See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318830422

Algorithmic Bias in Autonomous Systems
Conference Paper · August 2017
DOI: 10.24963/ijcai.2017/654

CITATIONS

READS

12

873

2 authors, including:
Alex John London
Carnegie Mellon University
96 PUBLICATIONS 1,289 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Alex John London on 02 January 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

Algorithmic Bias in Autonomous Systems
1

David Danks1,2 and Alex John London1,3
-Department of Philosophy; 2-Department of Psychology; 3-Center for Ethics and Policy
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA
{ddanks, ajlondon}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Algorithms play a key role in the functioning of
autonomous systems, and so concerns have
periodically been raised about the possibility of
algorithmic bias. However, debates in this area
have been hampered by different meanings and
uses of the term, “bias.” It is sometimes used as a
purely descriptive term, sometimes as a pejorative
term, and such variations can promote confusion
and hamper discussions about when and how to
respond to algorithmic bias. In this paper, we first
provide a taxonomy of different types and sources
of algorithmic bias, with a focus on their different
impacts on the proper functioning of autonomous
systems. We then use this taxonomy to distinguish
between algorithmic biases that are neutral or
unobjectionable, and those that are problematic in
some way and require a response. In some cases,
there are technological or algorithmic adjustments
that developers can use to compensate for
problematic bias. In other cases, however,
responses require adjustments by the agent,
whether human or autonomous system, who uses
the results of the algorithm. There is no “one size
fits all” solution to algorithmic bias.

1

Introduction

Algorithms play a critical role in all computational systems,
and particularly autonomous ones. In many ways,
algorithms¾whether those implemented in the autonomous
system itself, or those used for its learning and training—
constitute the “mind” of the autonomous system. Autonomy
requires capabilities to adapt and respond to novel, often illdefined, environments and contexts. And while hardware
and other software components are obviously important,
algorithms are the key to these abilities. In particular, we
focus here on learning, context detection, and adaptation
algorithms for autonomous systems, regardless of whether
the algorithms are employed in training and development, or
in real-time system activity, or in both regimes.
In many cases, we have turned towards autonomous
systems precisely because they do not have some of the

4691

flaws or shortcomings that we humans have. For example, a
self-driving vehicle cannot fall asleep at the wheel, or
become distracted by background music. If autonomous
systems are to be better versions of us (at least, for some
tasks), then we should plausibly aspire to use the most
unbiased algorithms that we can.
Despite this aspiration, several high-profile cases have
prompted a growing debate about the possibility, or perhaps
even inevitability, of algorithmic bias: roughly, the worry
that an algorithm is, in some sense, not merely a neutral
transformer of data or extractor of information. The issue of
algorithmic bias has garnered increasing attention in the
popular press and public discussions of technology,
including widespread concerns about “bias” (of one form or
another) in Google searches, Facebook feeds, applications
such as FaceApp, and other algorithmic systems. Moreover,
there is a rapidly growing scholarly literature about
algorithmic biases, including technological techniques to try
to mitigate it (e.g., [Barocas and Selbst, 2016; Garcia, 2016;
Kirkpatrick, 2016; Pedreschi, et al., 2008]).
The possibility of algorithmic bias is particularly
worrisome for autonomous or semi-autonomous systems, as
these need not involve a human “in the loop” (either active
or passive) who can detect and compensate for biases in the
algorithm or model. In fact, as systems become more
complicated and their workings more inscrutable to users, it
may become increasingly difficult to understand how
autonomous systems arrive at their decisions. To the extent
that bias is determined by the process of decision making
and not solely by outcomes, this inscrutability may
challenge the very notion of human monitoring for bias.
And so while autonomous systems might be regarded as
neutral or impartial, they could nonetheless employ biased
(in some sense) algorithms that do significant harm that
goes unnoticed and uncorrected, perhaps until it is too late.
As an example of such concerns (though not involving an
autonomous system), there have been several high-profile
demonstrations of systematic racial bias in algorithms used
to predict recidivism risk (i.e., the likelihood that an
individual convicted of a crime will commit another crime
in the future). These prediction algorithms have been touted
as “more objective” or “fairer,” and yet they seemingly
exhibit quite systematic biases against particular racial

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

groups, perhaps because they encode broader systematic
issues [ProPublica, 2016].
While we agree that there are very real worries here, we
also contend that many distinct issues have been unhelpfully
lumped together under the title of “algorithmic bias.” Public
discussions of algorithmic bias currently conflate many
different types, sources, and impacts of biases, with the net
result that the term has little coherent content. For example,
algorithmic bias in the recidivism prediction case involves
different possible statistical, ethical, and legal biases, all
entering in different places and in different ways. There is
no coherent notion of “algorithmic bias” in this case, or in
most others. And correspondingly, there is little reason to
think that there is one consistent or reliable response to
these myriad possible biases. Proper mitigation measures,
and whether we should respond at all, depend deeply on the
nature and source of the bias, as well as the norms and
values to which the performance of the system in question
must be accountable.
This paper is an effort to provide some structure and
clarity about concepts of, concerns about, and responses to
algorithmic bias. Section 2 provides a taxonomy of different
notions that one might have in mind with the term
‘algorithmic bias’. We then turn in Section 3 to consider the
issue of appropriate responses to algorithmic bias: when is a
response warranted, and what form(s) should it take? And
throughout, we focus on algorithmic bias in autonomous
systems; this is obviously not the only context in which we
can face significant or harmful algorithmic bias, but it is a
particularly important one, given the decision-making power
accorded to an autonomous system.

2

A Taxonomy of Algorithmic Bias

The word ‘bias’ often has a negative connotation in the
English language; bias is something to be avoided, or that is
necessarily problematic. In contrast, we understand the term
in an older, more neutral way: ‘bias’ simply refers to
deviation from a standard. Thus, we can have statistical bias
in which an estimate deviates from a statistical standard
(e.g., the true population value); moral bias in which a
judgment deviates from a moral norm; and similarly for
regulatory or legal bias, social bias, psychological bias, and
others. More generally, there are many types of bias
depending on the type of standard being used.
Crucially, the very same thing can be biased according to
one standard, but not according to another. For example,
many professions exhibit gender disparities, as in aerospace
engineering (7.8% women) or speech & language pathology
(97% women) [https://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat11.htm].
These professions clearly exhibit statistical biases relative to
the overall population, as there are deviations from the
population-level statistics. Such statistical biases are often
used as proxies to identify moral biases; in this case, the
underrepresentation of women in aerospace engineering
may raise questions about unobserved, morally problematic
structures working to the disadvantage of women in this
area. Similarly, the over-representation of women in speech
and language pathology may represent a moral bias,

4692

depending on additional information about the proper moral
baseline or standard for making such moral assessments.1
These observations are relatively uncontroversial on their
own, but they already present a problem for the notion of
“algorithmic bias”: there are multiple, different categories of
bias¾each of which could be further subdivided¾that are
often treated as equally problematic or significant, even
though not all forms of bias are on a par. Some may be
deeply problematic deviations from a standard, while others
may be valuable components of a reliable and ethically
desirable system. Moreover, these issues often cannot be
resolved in a purely technological manner, as they involve
value-laden questions such as what the distribution of
employment opportunities ought to be (independently of
what it actually empirically is), and what factors ought and
ought not to influence a person’s employment prospects.
Equally importantly, these different biases for algorithms
can arise from many different sources. We thus turn to the
task of disentangling different ways in which an algorithm
can come to be biased. Although these different sources
sometimes blur together, the taxonomy we provide creates a
richer space within which to assess whether a particular bias
merits a response, and, if so, what sort of corrective or
mitigation measures might be implemented.

2.1 Training Data Bias
One route to algorithmic bias is through deviations in the
training or input data provided to the algorithm. Algorithms
are trained or learn for particular uses or tasks (e.g., for the
population from which samples are drawn). The input data
that are used, however, can be biased in one or another way,
and thereby lead to biased responses for those tasks. In
particular, a “neutral” learning algorithm (in whatever sense
of that term one wants) can yield a model that strongly
deviates from the actual population statistics, or from a
morally justifiable type of model, simply because the input
or training data is biased in some way. Moreover, this type
of algorithmic bias (again, whether statistical, moral, legal,
or other) can be quite subtle or hidden, as developers often
do not publicly disclose the precise data used for training
the autonomous system. If we only see the final learned
model or its behavior, then we might not even be aware,
while using the algorithm for its intended purpose, that
biased data were used.
As an uncontroversial example, consider the development
of an autonomous vehicle, such as a self-driving car, and
suppose that the vehicle is intended for use throughout the
United States. If the vehicle’s training data and information
1

Statistical information may be asymetrically informative in
these professions as there is a history of gender-based workplace
discrimination against women, but not men. We might reasonably
think that deviations from population statistics are more likely to
reflect gender-based discrimination when they disadvantage
women. At the same time, it is certainly possible that there are
morally problematic factors that disadvantage men in the field of
speech & language pathology. One needs a well-defined moral
standard to make such assessments, as well as particular empirical
facts that likely go beyond just unequal gender representation.

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

come entirely or mostly from one location or city (e.g., the
Google cars in Mountain View, or the Uber cars in
Pittsburgh) and we use a relatively “neutral” learning
algorithm, then the resulting models will undoubtedly be
biased relative to the intended purpose and scope. For
example, the use of training data from only Pittsburgh could
lead the self-driving vehicle to learn regional norms or
customs, rather than patterns that apply across the intended
context of driving throughout the U.S. More generally, we
would have significant training data bias, since our data
come only from a small part of the world. As a result,
significant problems could result if this autonomous vehicle
were placed (without supervision) in the broader, intended
contexts of use.
This case makes vivid the importance of being clear
about the relevant standard against which we judge an
algorithm (or algorithm output) to be biased, particularly
when that standard is determined by the intended uses of the
algorithms or resulting models. Relative to the standard of
statistical distribution for Pittsburgh, for example, the selfdriving vehicle might well exhibit no algorithmic bias (or at
least, no statistical bias due to training data). In this case, the
algorithmic bias due to training data obtains only relative to
a different standard¾namely, the statistical distribution
over a much larger geographic area.
This example centers on bias relative to a statistical
standard, but training data bias can also lead to algorithmic
bias relative to a moral or normative standard. For example,
suppose that we are training a prediction algorithm that will
subsequently be used to make healthcare allocation
decisions in a population. This algorithm will causally
influence the future population, and so we might think it
important to ensure that it does not maintain a morally
problematic status quo. Because the relevant moral standard
(about the population) is different from the current empirical
facts, we might actually choose to train the algorithm using
data that reflects the desired statistical distribution. That is,
there might be cases in which we deliberately use biased
training data, thereby yielding algorithmic bias relative to a
statistical standard, precisely so the system will be
algorithmically unbiased relative to a moral standard.

2.2 Algorithmic Focus Bias
A second, related route to algorithmic bias is through
differential usage of information in the input or training
data. We often believe that an algorithm ought not use
certain types of information, whether for statistical, moral,
legal, or other reasons, even if those variables are available.
The obvious case is the use of morally irrelevant categories
to make morally relevant judgments, though things can get
quite complicated when the morally irrelevant category is
statistically informative about, but not constitutive of, some
other, morally relevant category (see Section 3 below). In
these cases, a source of algorithmic bias relative to a
statistical standard can be the deliberate non-use of certain
information, as that can lead to an unbiased algorithm
relative to a moral standard.

4693

A more neutral instance in which algorithmic focus can
lead to bias arises in the use of legally protected information
in certain types of decision-making. An otherwise “neutral”
learning algorithm might nonetheless exhibit algorithmic
bias (relative to a legal standard) due to a biased focus if it is
provided input variables that are not legally permitted to be
used for certain types of predictions or judgments. The
algorithm will deviate from the legal standard, even if it is
plausibly statistically unbiased (assuming unbiased training
data). That is, we can have a case with a “forced choice”
between two types of algorithmic bias: one relative to a
legal standard through the use of information that violates a
legal standard, versus one relative to a statistical standard by
ignoring statistically relevant information in the input data.

2.3 Algorithmic Processing Bias
A third source of algorithmic bias arises when the algorithm
itself is biased in various ways. The most obvious instance
of algorithmic processing bias is the use of a statistically
biased estimator in the algorithm. Of course, there might be
good reasons to use a statistically biased estimator; most
notably, it might exhibit significant reduced variance on
small sample sizes (i.e., the bias-variance tradeoff [Geman
et al., 1992]), and thereby greatly increase reliability and
robustness in future uses. That is, we might embrace
algorithmic processing as a bias source in order to mitigate
training data as a source of bias (Section 2.1).
In fact, many, perhaps even most, cases of bias due to
algorithmic processing arise through deliberate choice: we
consciously choose to use a “biased” (in some sense)
algorithm in order to mitigate or compensate for other types
of biases. For example, if one is concerned about the biasing
impacts of training data, then many algorithms provide
smoothing or regularization parameters that help to reduce
the possibility of overfitting noisy or anomalous input data.
While this choice might be absolutely correct in terms of
future performance, it is nonetheless a source of algorithmic
bias, as our learning algorithm is not neutral (in a statistical
sense). As we noted earlier, not all biases¾algorithmic or
otherwise¾are bad.
In the context of autonomous systems, algorithmic
processing is arguably a widespread source of bias,
precisely because of the importance of ensuring robustness
in our algorithms. It also arises in cases such as “ethical
governors” that alter the output of the learning algorithm so
that the autonomous system is more likely to make ethical
choices (in some sense), even at the cost of reducing the
likelihood of success on non-moral mission-oriented
criteria. For example, an autonomous weapons system
might be provided with an ethical regulator that will not
allow it to fire at perceived enemy combatants if they are
near a UNESCO protected historical site. The processing of
the algorithm is statistically biased in the sense that its
judgments or decisions deviate from what a “neutral”
algorithm might have done, but it helps ensure the system
conforms to important moral norms [Arkin et al., 2012].
These ethical modules bias the algorithms in important
ways, though not negatively.

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

2.4 Transfer Context Bias
The previous three routes to algorithmic bias centered on
technical or computational matters. In contrast, the last two
arise from inappropriate uses or deployment of the
algorithms and autonomous systems. As noted earlier, we
deploy algorithms for particular uses or purposes, and in
particular contexts of operation, even if those are often not
explicitly stated. However, when the algorithm or resulting
model is employed outside of those contexts, then it will not
necessarily perform according to appropriate standards,
whether statistical, moral, or legal. Of course, there is a
sense in which this is arguably user bias, not algorithmic
bias. Nonetheless, we contend that many cases that get
labeled as “algorithmic bias” are actually due to
unwarranted application or extension of an algorithm
outside of its intended contexts.
For example, consider the earlier discussion of selfdriving vehicles intended for use throughout the U.S. These
autonomous systems would clearly perform in a biased (in
the negative sense) manner if they were deployed in, say,
the United Kingdom, since people drive on the left-hand
side of the road there. Moreover, this biased performance
arises from inappropriate use outside of intended contexts.
A more subtle example of transfer context bias could arise
in translating a healthcare algorithm or autonomous system
from a research hospital to a rural clinic. Almost certainly,
the system would have significant algorithmic bias relative
to a statistical standard, as the transfer context likely has
quite different characteristics. This statistical bias could also
be a moral bias if, say, the autonomous system assumed that
the same level of resources were available, and so made
morally flawed healthcare resource allocation decisions.
There is a fine line between transfer context and training
data sources of bias. For example, if the self-driving vehicle
had been intended for worldwide driving, then we would
arguably have a training data source of bias, not a transfer
context bias. There is, however, an important general
difference between (a) learning from biased data about the
intended contexts of operation (training data source); and
(b) inappropriately using an algorithm outside of its
intended contexts of operation (transfer context source).

2.5 Interpretation Bias
A final source of algorithmic bias is misinterpretation of the
algorithm’s outputs or functioning by the user, or by the
broader autonomous system within which the algorithm
functions. While this bias might be characterized simply as
user error, the situation is often more complex than this. In
particular, interpretation bias represents a mismatch, even
within the intended context of operation, between (i) the
information an algorithm produces; and (ii) the information
requirements of the user or system that uses that output.
Moreover, there is widespread potential for this kind of
informational mismatch, since developers are rarely able to
fully specify the exact semantic content (in all contexts) of
their algorithms or models. Systems that take this output as
input can thus easily be misdirected by spurious or
unreliable features of that information.

4694

As a simple example, consider the use of regression
analyses to generate causal or policy predictions for
subsequent decision-making. Standard regression methods
yield non-zero coefficients for any input variable that is
statistically associated with the target, conditional on the
other input variables. Thus, effects will typically have nonzero regression coefficients with respect to their causes,
even though the causal flow goes in the opposite direction.
As a result, non-zero regression coefficients should not be
interpreted as indicating degree of causal strength, even
though this practice is quite common in certain scientific
domains. Similarly biased judgments about causal structure
or strength (i.e., that deviate from the actual causal structure
in the world) can easily be misused in biased ways by
autonomous systems.
As a more practical example, consider an autonomous
monitoring system that makes decisions about how to shift
its surveillance resources to track the most relevant targets.
Such a system presumably has one or more algorithms for
inferring the “surveillance value” of different individuals.
However, there are many different possible interpretations
or semantic content for this “surveillance value,” including:
overall uncertainty about the individual’s identity;
probability that the individual is currently engaged in
surveillance-worthy activities; similarity to a large historical
database of nefarious actors; and so forth. The autonomous
monitoring system may well need to be sensitive to these
differences; it could exhibit significant biases¾statistical,
moral, and legal¾if it incorrectly interprets the
“surveillance value” module output.

3

Responses to Algorithmic Bias

Algorithms in autonomous systems present many “surfaces”
through which different types of bias may enter the system.
Because algorithmic bias is not a single monolithic thing,
we must be careful about making unqualified assertions of
bias, or even more colloquial appeals to notions of neutrality
and objectivity. Instead, claims of bias¾particularly claims
of negative or pernicious bias¾require concrete
specifications of the relevant standard(s) or norm(s), as well
as consideration of the source(s) of bias. In addition, we
must also consider the role of the algorithm in question, and
its outputs, within the overall system. In particular, there are
cases in which algorithmic bias on one dimension can
contribute to appropriate performance on a more important
dimension, or where the bias or deviation is important in
enabling the overall system to achieve desired goals in ways
that conform to relevant ethical and legal standards.

3.1 Identifying Problematic Bias
The first step in potential mitigation efforts is to assess
whether a given bias is even problematic when all things are
considered. As we have previously seen, there are cases in
which, say, a degree of statistical algorithmic bias might be
necessary in order to reduce or eliminate moral algorithmic
bias. And if this statistical bias is relatively innocuous or
minor, then we might well judge that it poses no problem
(for us, given our goals). That is, we might have statistical

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

algorithmic bias that is neutral in impact on our values, and
that provides some other significant benefit. In fact, we
might even actively work to create a statistical algorithmic
bias, as noted earlier in the context of a decision system that
influences the future population. In that case, the statistical
algorithmic bias enables us to reduce a moral societal bias.
These are concrete instances in which algorithmic bias may
be socially or ethically desirable, and so the aspirational
goal of algorithmic neutrality would actually be detrimental
once all things are considered.
Even if all algorithmic biases somehow could be
eliminated, we should not assume that doing so would be
beneficial or desirable. The complexity of these cases argues
for caution when considering whether and how to approach
mitigation in particular cases. These considerations will
typically be very challenging and complex, as they require
us to consider the relative values that we assign to different
aspects of a problem. They are also complicated by the fact
that diverse societies exhibit significant variation in both
immediate and higher-order relevant values.
As an example of this complexity, consider the seemingly
straightforward question of what moral standard should be
used when autonomous vehicles face life-and-death
decisions about how to distribute risk over the vehicle’s
passengers and people outside of the car. There is clearly
diversity and argument about the right answer to this
question, as seen in the large literature on the so-called
“Trolley Problem.” Some argue that the best ethical
standard would treat all lives equally, and thereby require
the vehicle to attempt to minimize the number of casualties
regardless of where they are located. Others argue that
special weight can be given to the vehicle’s passengers, and
so the vehicle can choose actions that are most likely to
minimize harm to them. Any design choice will thereby lead
to a system that someone thinks is biased. For example,
autonomous vehicles that prioritise passenger safety would
exhibit a moral bias according to the standards of the former
position, while proponents of the second view would regard
this behavior as unbiased or appropriate.
Additional considerations may also be relevant to the “all
things considered” determination of whether an ethical bias
in favor of passengers should be eliminated or corrected.
For example, suppose an ethical bias in favor of passengers
turned out (after empirical investigation) to be the only way
to secure trust in autonomous vehicles. Since this
technology is reasonably expected to reduce the current high
levels of traffic-related fatalities, then there may be an “all
things considered” ethical obligation to act so as to increase
the likelihood of their adoption, even if that means using a
“local” ethical bias.
These questions are all fundamentally about our values,
both individual and societal, and as such, cannot be entirely
answered using technology. They are ethical questions in
the sense that they concern our human values and goals, and
the means that are permissible to use in pursuing them.
Nonetheless, they are questions that cannot be avoided as
we assess the performance of algorithms and the systems of
which they are a part.

4695

In light of this insight, the foundation of any process for
assessing the potential for problematic bias must be a robust
and comprehensive understanding of the role that an
autonomous system is likely to play in the social contexts in
which it is deployed, as well as the basic ethical and legal
norms that are relevant to that context. Failure to appreciate
the full range of relevant ethical and legal norms in force in
a context increases the likelihood that autonomous systems
will suffer from transfer context or interpretation bias.

3.2 Intervening on Problematic Bias
Although some algorithmic biases are neutral or even
desirable, many are problematic and should be mitigated. As
noted above, a prerequisite for this mitigation is an
understanding of the relationship between the autonomous
system and the ethical and legal norms in force in the
relevant contexts. If we have such understanding, then we
could potentially mitigate simply by improving this
relationship. For example, we might restrict the scope of
operation for the system in question so that there is no
longer a mismatch in system performance and task
demands. Or we might attempt to redesign the system to
ensure that it operates in better conformity with relevant
norms and constraints.
At a more general level, if we determine that some form
of bias requires mitigation or response then we have to be
willing to consider responses of various kinds. In the bestcase scenario, we might develop a novel algorithm that does
not exhibit the problematic bias. Or we might be able to use
one type of algorithmic bias to compensate for some other
ineliminable bias. For example, suppose our measurement
or sampling processes in some domain produce an
ineliminable training data bias. If we know the nature of this
training data bias, then we can use a bias in the algorithmic
processing to offset or correct for the data bias, thereby
yielding an overall unbiased system. That is, we can try to
develop a system that is overall statistically unbiased, even
though different components each exhibit algorithmic bias.
In other cases, this kind of balancing or compensation
will require adjustments in the system, whether human or
machine, that uses or contains the algorithm. For example,
consider a case in which algorithmic focus bias leads to a
deviation from a moral standard. That is, the algorithm
deviates from our ethical norms about what information
should be used. Moreover, suppose that this algorithmic bias
cannot be eliminated for some reason. In that case, though,
an autonomous system or human using the algorithm output
could deliberately employ a compensatory bias based in
interpretation bias; for instance, the autonomous system
might not take action solely on the basis of the algorithm
output. More generally, there are multiple ways to combat
algorithmic bias when we judge that a response is required.
We are not limited only to technological responses.
Of course, we might be in a situation where there simply
is no technological, psychological, or social way to fully
correct for the problematic sources, features, and biases.
Barocas and Selbst [2016] make this point quite vividly in
the domain of employment discrimination. Instead, we must

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

decide between algorithms that exhibit different biases to
determine which is the least bad. In many cases, this choice
will be between algorithms that are unbiased relative to (a)
statistical or performance standards; or (b) moral or legal
norms. These choices require that we look outside of the
local technology, or even the local users. These decisions
require judgments about relative values, and which we think
are more important in this context.
Particularly salient examples of this type of choice arise
when we have “sensitive” variables (whether morally or
legally) that carry statistical information relevant to solving
the problem at hand. That is, some variables ought (in a
moral or legal sense) not carry information, but they
nonetheless do so statistically. In these cases, we must
directly confront questions of value, as we cannot achieve
an overall algorithm or system that is unbiased relative to
every standard: using the variables will violate a moral or
legal norm; not using the variables will lead to statistical
deviations. In fact, in these cases, it is no longer clear what
is meant by the term “unbiased”, as that term suggests that
we should strive towards an end-state that is not achievable
in this situation.
These choices can become even more complex, as the
“sensitive” variable might be capable of serving as an
informational proxy for a morally unproblematic, though
hard to measure, variable or feature [Pedreschi et al., 2008].
For example, we typically think that gender is not morally
relevant for job performance evaluations, and so a
prediction algorithm that includes gender would exhibit a
moral bias due to algorithmic focus bias. However, suppose
that gender is correlated with some trait T that (i) carries
information about job performance; (ii) can be used without
moral objection; but (iii) is hard to measure or observe. The
first two aspects imply that inclusion of T in our algorithm
would be unproblematic, and probably desirable. The third
aspect, however, means that we cannot actually incorporate
T in practice. Are we instead permitted to use gender in our
prediction algorithm? On the one hand, it seems that we still
have the moral bias due to algorithmic focus bias. On the
other hand, we are using gender only as a proxy variable, so
the moral standard is less clear. We do not claim to have a
fixed or definite answer to this question; rather, we raise it
simply to point out the complexities that can arise even after
we answer the exceptionally difficult questions about
whether the bias should be minimized or mitigated.

whether those norms are statistical, moral, legal, or other;
and whether deviating from that standard is objectionable
once all things are considered.
In this paper, we have developed a taxonomy of different
kinds and sources of algorithmic bias in an attempt to isolate
possible reasons or causes. The different sources are clearly
not mutually exclusive, nor do we claim exhaustivity for our
taxonomy, though we believe that it covers the vast majority
of cases of algorithmic bias. Importantly, algorithmic bias
can arise at every stage of the development-implementationapplication process, from data sampling to measurement to
algorithm design to algorithmic processing to application in
the world to interpretation by a human end-user or some
other autonomous system. And each entry point for
algorithmic bias presents a different set of considerations
and possibilities.
As we saw throughout this paper, the taxonomy is not a
mere labeling exercise, but rather provides guidance about
ways to mitigate various forms of algorithmic bias when
they arise. For example, we can often compensate for
algorithmic bias in one stage with algorithmic bias in a
different one. More generally, we need to think about
algorithmic bias (with respect to various norms) in terms of
the whole system, including the consumer¾human or
machine¾of the algorithm output. The “ecosystem” around
an algorithm contains many opportunities for both the
introduction of bias, and also the injection of compensatory
biases to minimize the harms (if any) done by the
algorithmic bias.

4

[Garcia, 2016] Megan Garcia. Racist in the machine: The
disturbing implications of algorithmic bias. World Policy
Journal, 33(4): 111-117. Winter 2016.

Conclusions

Both popular and academic articles invariably present
algorithmic bias as something bad that should be avoided.
We have tried to show that the situation is significantly
more complex than this. There are many different types of
algorithmic bias that arise relative to multiple classes of
standards or norms, and from many different sources.
Moreover, many of these biases are neutral or can even be
beneficial in our efforts to achieve our diverse goals. The
bare accusation that some algorithm is biased is therefore
uninformative, as it tells us nothing about the nature, scope,
source, or size of the deviation from one or more norms;

4696

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the anonymous reviewers from the IJCAI Special
Track on AI & Autonomy for their valuable comments on
an earlier version of this paper.

References
[Arkin et al., 2012] Ronald C. Arkin, Patrick Ulam, and
Alan R. Wagner. Moral decision-making in autonomous
systems: Enforcement, moral emotions, dignity, trust and
deception. Proceedings of the IEEE, 100(3): 571-589.
March 2012.
[Barocas and Selbst, 2016] Solon Barocas and Andrew D.
Selbst. Big Data’s disparate impact. California Law
Review, 104: 671-732. 2016.

[Geman et al., 1992] Stuart Geman, Elie Bienenstock, and
René Doursat. Neural networks and the bias/variance
dilemma. Neural Computation, 4: 1-58. 1992.
[Kirkpatrick, 2016] Keith Kirkpatrick. Battling algorithmic
bias. Communications of the ACM, 59(10): 16-17.
October 2016.

Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-17)

[Pedreschi et al., 2008] Dino Pedreschi, Salvatore Ruggieri,
and Franco Turini. Discrimination-aware data mining.
Proceedings of KDD 2008.
[ProPublica, 2016] Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu,
and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias. May 23, 2016.
https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-riskassessments-in-criminal-sentencing

4697

View publication stats

