16th International Conference on Artificial Reality and Telexistence (ICAT2006), pp.1310-1321 (2006)

Indoor/Outdoor Pedestrian Navigation with an
Embedded GPS/RFID/Self-contained Sensor
System
Masakatsu Kourogi1, Nobuchika Sakata12 , Takashi Okuma1 , and
Takeshi Kurata12
1

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST),
Umezono 1–1–1, Central 2, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305–8568, Japan
m.kourogi@aist.go.jp,
WWW home page: http://itri.aist.go.jp/rwig/ari/
2
Tsukuba University, Tenodai 1–1–1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305–0006, Japan

Abstract. This paper describes an embedded pedestrian navigation system composed of a self-contained sensors, the Global Positioning System
(GPS) and an active Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) tag system.
We use self-contained sensors (accelerometers, gyrosensors and magnetometers) to estimate relative displacement by analyzing human walking
locomotion. The GPS is used outdoors to adjust errors in position and
direction accumulated by the dead-reckoning. In indoor environments,
we use an active RFID tag system sparsely placed in key spot areas. The
tag system obviously has limited availability and thus dead-reckoning is
used to cover the environment. We propose a method of complementary
compensation algorithm for the GPS/RFID localization and the selfcontained navigation represented by simple equations in a Kalman ﬁlter
framework. Experimental results using the proposed method reveals that
integration of GPS/RFID/dead-reckoning improve positioning accuracy
in both indoor and outdoor environments. The pedestrian positioning is
realized as a software module with the web-based APIs so that crossplatform development can easily be achieved. A pedestrian navigation
system is implemented on an embedded wearable system and is proven
to be useful even for unexperienced users.

1

Introduction

Wearable computing systems can be highly useful if the position and direction of
the users are provided, which are one of the most essential pieces of contextual
information. This paper aims at gaining the position and direction of pedestrians
and providing personal navigation services.
In outdoor environments, the GPS is the most promising technology to acquire the position. However, the precision of the position can be degraded by
several conditions and is sometimes unavailable since the GPS signals can be
easily blocked by structures such as buildings. It is also diﬃcult for the GPS

to achieve stride level precision for wearable systems which has strict limitation in size and weight of the hardware. We use a method of dead-reckoning [1]
to complement precision and availability of the GPS. Dead-reckoning measures
and analyzes human walking locomotion by self-contained sensors to estimate
relative displacement.
In indoor environments where the GPS is unavailable, RFID technology is
used to locate persons equipped with the active RFID tags. RFID tag readers
are placed in key spots such as entrances and hallways so that the reader can
acquire the position of each wearable system by detecting the ID signal from the
tag. The wearable system will be notiﬁed of the position via wireless network.
And combinational method of active RFID tag localization and dead-reckoning
is described.
Ladetto et. al. proposed dead-reckoning method combining the GPS, digital
magnetic compass and gyrosensors [3]. However, the method assumes that azimuth computed by diﬀerentiating two GPS results are available if needed. The
GPS will easily become unavailable even in outdoor environments, especially on
urban area where high-rise buildings block the signals from the satellites. The
method also assumes that the earth magnetic ﬁeld can be acquired at relatively
high accuracy. However, if the user is equipped with many electronic devices
that cause magnetic disturbance locally and dynamically, the magnetic compass
will not give a good estimation of the user’s azimuth. Schwartz et. al. proposed
an indoor localization system based on an active RFID tag system and infrared
beacons [4]. Although the proposed system works well in indoor environments,
many IR beacons and RFID tags are required to cover the environments. Lee
et. al. proposed a dead-reckoning method based on wearable inertial sensors [5].
The method, however, requires ﬁne tuning for several thresholds most of which
are experimentally acquired by repetitive trails, and thus has diﬃculty to exploit
multiple external sources of information to be theoretically integrated.
We implement the proposed method as an embedded system to output position and azimuth of a user. A pedestrian navigation system for indoor/outdoor
environments is constructed by coordination with the embedded system and
external navigation applications. The ﬁrst key contribution of this work is to
propose a method to integrate estimation of position and direction by deadreckoning, the GPS and the RFID tag system with a Kalman ﬁlter framework
so that the method can be combined with other source of information as for
user’s position and direction. The second is to provide implementation of the
method which realizes pedestrian navigation system usable both indoors and
outdoors with an wearable embedded computing system. The implementation is
built from software modules connected with each other by the web-based APIs
and thus easily to be cooperated with other web-based applications.

2

Pedestrian positioning in a Kalman filter framework

The pedestrian positioning can be achieved by detection and measurement of
human walking locomotion characterized by its stride and azimuth, and updating

the current position incrementally. We proposed a method of dead-reckoning in
the Kalman ﬁlter framework [1]. In this method, the state vector st is written
in the equation below:
(1)
st = [xt , yt , vxt , vyt ]T ,
where (xt , yt ) is the position of a user at discrete time t and (vxt , vyt ) is its
time derivative, that is the velocity vector. By analyzing acceleration vector
(ax , ay , az ) and angular velocity vector (ωx , ωy , ωz ) observed near the center of
gravity of human body, its walking locomotion can be detected and measured.
We proposed the method to detect walking locomotion and estimate the walking
stride lt [1]. Walking direction (azimuth) θt can be estimated by time integration
of the angular velocity (ωx , ωy , ωz ) with adjustment of its cumulative errors by
sensing the earth magnetic vector (mx , my , mz ). We proposed the method in our
past research [2].
It is supposed that the position and the velocity of the state vector can be
observed, we obtain Kalman ﬁlter equations by the following:
st+1|t = st + Kt (Ot − st )
−1

Kt = Pt (Pt + Rt )
Pt+1|t = Pt − Kt Pt

(2)
(3)
(4)

where Kt is a Kalman gain, Ot is an observation vector, Pt is the error
covariance matrix for the state vector, and Rt is the error covariance matrix
for Ot . While no observation is acquired, the state vector st and its covariance
matrix Pt are projected by the equations below:
⎡
⎤
1 0 Δt 0
⎢ 0 1 0 Δt ⎥
⎥
st+1 = F(Δt)st ,
(5)
F(Δt) = ⎢
⎣ 0 0 1 0 ⎦ , (7)
Pt+1 = F(Δt)Pt F(Δt)T + Q, (6)
00 0 1
and Q is the error covariance matrix for the projection in the equation (5), and
Δt is a discrete time interval between t and t + 1.
If the observation vector Ot and its error covariance matrix ROt are obtained, these observation can be integrated into the estimation in the Kalman
ﬁlter equations represented by (2), (3) and (4). In this paper, we will use deadreckoning, the GPS and an active RFID tag system as sources of positioning
information. Section 3 describes error model of the GPS and dead-reckoning
and how these models are used to fuse the GPS into the proposed positioning
method. In the section 4, we will introduce an error model of positioning by
the active RFID tag system and describe how to use the positioning results in
updating estimation in the proposed framework.

3

Error models of the GPS and dead-reckoning

To construct error models for the GPS and dead-reckoning, we ﬁrst categorize
the positioning error in the GPS by the causes and then construct an error model

for each source of error. Meanwhile, estimation error of relative displacement by
dead-reckoning is modeled separately into direction and stride error.
3.1

Error of the GPS positioning

Positioning error in the GPS is mainly caused by three factors: (A) error caused
by multipath eﬀect, (B) biased error caused by signal propagation delay, (C)
unbiased random error [6][7]. GPS signals are degraded by multipath eﬀect such
as signal reﬂection and diﬀraction. Since the multipath eﬀect has very localized
cause it is diﬃcult to construct a generalized model.
We determine if a positioning result of the GPS is degraded by multipath
eﬀect so as to be able to discard such degraded results. The determination of
multipath eﬀect is realized in combination with the dead-reckoning as described
in section 3.3.
GPS signals are delayed when passing through ionosphere and convection
sphere. Delayed signals increase pseudorange and thus cause biased error. The
biased error is known to be constant locally if measured by the same set of
satellites. Thus, any GPS positioning results can be compensated by observing
the biased error at ﬁxed known point where all of GPS satellites in the sky can
be monitored. DGPS is bias monitoring and broadcasting service to provide the
bias error and thus achieves more accurate positioning.
The remaining error can be considered as unbiased random error, which is
white noise. Error variance σr2 can be determined by the Horizontal Dilution of
Precision (HDOP) value on geometrical arrangement of the satellites.
Therefore, a GPS positioning result pgps (t) free of multipath error can be
described as follows:
pgps (t) = p(t) + eb (t) + er (t),
(8)
where p(t) is the true position, eb (t) is the biased error, and er (t) is the unbiased
random error. Since eb (t) can be estimated at the ﬁxed observation point, pgps (t)
is handled using the Kalman ﬁlter framework.
3.2

Error of dead-reckoning

The dead-reckoning detects and measures relative displacement stepwise by analyzing human walking locomotion using self-contained sensors (accelerometers,
gyrosensors and magnetometers). The process is shown below:
1. Estimate the moving vector di and the walking stride li .
2. Compute the i-th relative displacement vector mi = li di .
By accumulating the relative displacement vector, the current relative position
from the basis point can be computed.
To fuse the observation into the Kalman ﬁlter framework, the observation
as for the position and the velocity are required. If user’s walking locomotion is
detected and its stride lt , its time interval T required for walking and walking

azimuth θt are obtained, we update the state vector and its covariance matrix
by setting the observation Ot = [x̂t , yˆt , vˆxt , vˆyt ]T is shown below:
Ot = [xt + lt cos θt , yt + lt sin θt ,

lt cos θ lt sin θ T
,
] .
T
T

(9)

If no walking locomotion is detected within a ﬁxed length of time, an observation that no movement has been made is obtained. Thus, the observation
vector Ot can be written in the following equation:
Ot = [xt , yt , 0, 0]T .

(10)

The estimated position has two types of error caused by dead-reckoning: error
in estimation of moving direction di and error in stride li . The error model of
positioning result in dead-reckoning is constructed in the following section.
We use a method of estimating the walking stride li and the moving direction
di [1]. The error of li is known to have the normal distribution and the variance
is proportional to the stride. The error of directional angle of di similarly is
Gaussian and the variance σd2 has already been determined by the repetitive
experiments using the attitude reference system with high accuracy.
Distribution for azimuth T i

GPS data excluded

approximation

Distribution for stride

Gaussian
distribution

li

Previous position

95% confidence area
estimated by dead-reckoning

GPS data out of 95% area
is excluded for computation
GPS data included

The previous GPS data
free of multipath effect.

Fig. 1. Error distribution and its ap- Fig. 2. Sorting out GPS data with
proximation by the normal distribution dead-reckoning

Considering the i-th walking step, the position after movement pi has complex distribution as shown in Fig. 1. Since the standard deviation σd of moving
direction is known to be 0.2–0.4 [deg], the arc region generated by the error of
direction can be approximated to the tangent line. Therefore, the composition of
the two types of error can be approximated by the Gaussian distribution whose
axes are the tangent line and the radial line.
Suppose the i-th position (xi , yi ) has the normal distribution whose mean
vector is mi and the covariance matrix is Ci , and the i-th moving unit vector
(dxi , dyi ) have Gaussian distribution whose mean direction is θi and variance is
σθ2i . The error of moving direction ei can be approximated as Gaussian distribution along with the tangent line when the variance of direction σθ2i is small
enough. This is equivalent to the approximation shown in Fig. 1. The mean vector of moving displacement vector (dxi , dyi ) is (cos θi , sin θi ), and the error of

direction ei can be regarded as Gaussian whose mean vector is zero and variance
is (li tan σθi )2 .
The i + 1-th position (xi+1 , yi+1 ) can be written as a linear combination of
these variables as shown below:
⎡ ⎤
xi


⎢ yi ⎥
xi + li cos θi − ei sin θi
xi+1
⎥
(11)
=
= Ai ⎢
⎣ li ⎦ ,
yi+1
yi + li sin θi + ei cos θi
ei


1 0 cos θi − sin θi
.
0 1 sin θi cos θi
If (xi , yi , li , ei ) is considered to have the normal distribution, the i + 1-th
position (xi+1 , yi+1 ) is also Gaussian whose mean vector mi+1 and the covariance
matrix Ci+1 are expressed as the following equations:
where Ai =

mi+1 = mi + li di ,
Ci+1 =

(12)

Ai Ri ATi ,

(13)
T

where Ri is the covariance matrix of xi yi li ei . Since (xi , yi ), li and ei
are independent with each other, the covariance between each variable is zero
and Ri can be expressed as follows:
⎤
⎡
0
Ci 0
⎦.
0
Ri = ⎣ 0 σl2i
(14)
2
0 0 (li tan σθi )
Therefore the estimated position (xi , yi ) by dead-reckoning has Gaussian
distribution whose mean vector mi and its covariance matrix Ci are expressed
in Equations (12)(13).
As for estimated velocity, the proposed method [1] gives Gaussian uncertainty
of each estimation by the standard deviation σv on statistical basis. The error
covariance matrix RDR in equation (3) can be written in the following equation:
⎤
⎡
0
0
Ci
⎦
0
RDR = ⎣ 0 (σv cos θi )2
(15)
0
0
(σv sin θi )2
3.3

Integration of the GPS and dead-reckoning

GPS estimation free of multipath eﬀect shown in Equation (8) is Gaussian, and
relative displacement estimated by dead-reckoning is Gaussian with Equations
(12) and (13). Therefore, estimation by the GPS and dead-reckoning can be
fused together in the Kalman ﬁlter framework.
As described earlier, GPS estimation degraded by multipath eﬀect is not
Gaussian. We therefore exclude GPS data out of the 95% conﬁdence region

estimated by dead-reckoning as outliers to reduce inﬂuence caused by multipath
eﬀect shown in Fig. 2.
The GPS estimation can be used in two ways: single positioning mode and
diﬀerentiating mode of two positioning results (two positions and its elapsed
time), which are required to be included in the 95% conﬁdence region. In the
former mode, a single GPS estimation is used to update the position by observation vector OGS = [xgps , ygps , 0, 0]T , but not used to update the velocity. The
variance of position σGS is determined by HDOP (Horizontal Dilution of Position) value of the estimation. We therefore obtain the error covariance matrix
RGS by the following equation:
⎤
⎡ 2
σGS 0 0 0
⎢ 0 σ2 0 0 ⎥
GS
⎥.
RGS = ⎢
(16)
2
⎣ 0
0 σ∞
0 ⎦
2
0
0 0 σ∞
The latter mode does not give absolute position but its moving direction θG and
the speed vG with lesser inﬂuence of biased error of the GPS than the former
mode. The observation vector can be written below:
OGD = [(xt + vG cos θG ), (yt + vG sin θG ), vG cos θG , vG sin θG ]T .

(17)

Error of diﬀerentiation of two positioning results has same error characteristics as
unbiased random noise explained in Section 3.1 since the diﬀerentiation cancels
the biased error. Since error of moving direction θG is assume to be small,
⎤
⎡
0
0
0
(σGD cos θG )2
⎥
⎢
0
(σGD sin θG )2
0
0
⎥,
RGD = ⎢
(18)
⎦
⎣
0
0
0
c(σGD cos θ)2
2
0
0
0
c(σGD sin θ)
where c is constant representing uncertainty of measurement of time T . However, it is noticed that two positioning results are required to be not so far to
accurately estimate its velocity since it assumes linear movement of a user during
the measurement.

4

Positioning by active RFID tag system

In indoor environments where the GPS is not available, we deploy an active
RFID tag system of which each tag is held by user and RFID readers are placed
on ﬁxed position so that user’s location can be determined by detecting the ID
signal from the tag. A design for reachable distance of ID signals is especially
important since the distance determines the ability to narrow down the range of
location.
We assume the active RFID tag is attached at hip height (around 0.6m) and
RFID tags and readers are designed to be detected within 1.5m. This design
allows the RFID location system to acquire the position to a precision of 1.3m.

Preliminary experiments reveal positioning error of the RFID location system
has the normal distribution with standard deviation σtag = 0.4 [m].
Since the implementation of the RFID tag system allows the ID signals to
reach too far to accurately estimate velocity of the user. Thus the observation
vector Ot does not specify the velocity of a user but its position only. Then,
the observation vector is provided if the ID signal is received by the reader
placed at ﬁxed position (xtag , ytag ) and is written in the following equation:
⎡

⎤
2
σtag
0 0 0
2
⎢
⎥
(19) Rtag = ⎢ 0 σtag 0 0 ⎥ (20)
Ot = [xtag , ytag , 0, 0]T ,
⎣ 0
0 σ∞ 0 ⎦
0
0 0 σ∞
and the error covariance matrix Rtag is given by experimentally measured deviation σtag of reachable location.

5
5.1

Experiments
Implementation

We implemented the proposed method on an embedded computing system composed of a GPS module, self-contained sensors and a RFID tag as for sensory
parts. The system outputs estimation of position and azimuth in the standard
format called NMEA-0183 used by many of GPS receivers so that commercial
navigation software can work with the output immediately. We use Google Earth
for this purpose.
An outlook of our navigation system is shown in Fig. 3, and the schematic
diagram of the system in shown in Fig. 4. We use ViewRanger (OS: NetBSD)
from Japan SGI as an embedded computing system whose size is 95mm x 65mm
x 33mm and weight of 130g. The GPS module in the system is a standard
receiver using the L1 band and C/A coding by stand alone positioning with
12 channels. We use active RFID tags and readers (which use 303.2MHz band
and provide 2400bps communication link) from Y-matic Inc, and 3DM-GX1 (3axes accelerometers, gyrosensors and magnetometers) from MicroStrain Inc for
self-contained sensors.
Our implementation is composed of software modules which are connected
with each other by the web-based APIs so that cross-platform development can
be easy to be achieved.
5.2

Experimental results

We have conducted experiments on ﬁve users collecting sensory data from the
self-contained sensors, the GPS receiver and the detecting log of the ID signal
from the user’s tag by the active RFID tag readers placed in the building where
the users are passing through. In this experiment, each user equipped with the
system walked outdoors and then went into the building, took an elevator from

Orientation Tracker
HMD

Camera

Camera
Orientation Tracker

HMD user

Handheld PC
Browsing system (SONY VAIO type U)
Attitude tracker
CCD camera
Equipped with
browsing PC

Google Earth
(Navigation application)

Data distribution
engine

From/To
the control server
Position/direction
of other users

JPEG image

GPS
RFID Tag

Estimation results of position and direction
(in NMEA0183 or CSV format)

Self-contained sensors

Embedded
Computer

Handheld display user

Self-contained
sensors

Dead-reckoning

GPS module

GPS positioning

RFID tag

RFID positioning

Equipped with
user’s hip

PP module

Adjustment
request

(via Wireless network)
From
the RFID tag system

Embedded computing system (via Wireless network)

Fig. 3. Outlook of the pedestrian nav- Fig. 4. Diagram of the pedestrian navigaigation system
tion system

ground to the 3rd ﬂoor and entered to a room which is the destination. Total
distance of walking path is 368.1 meter (outdoor: 247.2 meter, indoor: 120.9
meter). Two RFID readers are placed at the entrance (a windbreak room) to
the building and the elevator hallway at the ground ﬂoor.
First, overall trajectories generated by the dead-reckoning only, GPS only and
the proposed method (GPS/RFID/dead-reckoning integrated) and the ground
truth data on one of the users are shown in Fig. 5.
In this run of experiment, the GPS ﬁrstly gives stable positioning results with
constant oﬀset errors. Then dead-reckoning was severely degraded in the middle
of experiments because of drift errors in gyrosensors. However, diﬀerentiation of
GPS estimation fairly adjusted the bias and prevented the estimated position
from far more deviation. The GPS signal has been useless at the half of walking
distance outdoors because of multipath eﬀect caused by the high-rise building.
After the signal was lost, dead-reckoning and the RFID tag system adjusted and
updated estimation of the position and the direction. Fig. 7 shows two positions
where the RFID readers are placed and estimated position is appropriately adjusted by the RFID tag system. The trajectories in the 3rd ﬂoor is depicted in
Fig. 8.
Averaged error of distance across the ﬁve users estimated by dead-reckoning
(DR) only, GPS only and the proposed method are shown in Fig. 6. It is noticed
that in outdoor environments GPS estimation improved positioning accuracy
although the stand-alone GPS positioning has given less accurate positioning
results since diﬀerentiation of GPS results were used to adjust errors in position
and direction. In indoor environments, the RFID positioning pinpointed each
user’s location and drastically reduced errors in positions.

Ou

rm
eth
od
Gro
und
truth

DR

onl
y

Due to drift errors in
gyrosensors, the result of
dead-reckoning deviates.
Gro
und
tru

DR only
GPS only

th

Our method
Differentiation of GPS results
adjusted the error in direction.

25m

GPS only

Start here

Fig. 5. Overall trajectories and surrounding environments

5.3

Practical usage of the system in an openhouse situation

We have constructed the pedestrian navigation system for multiple users and a
control center system which acts as a data exchange server for each user’s location/direction. On the control center side, the real-time location of participants
can be monitored and be intervened for adjustment if necessary. We deployed our
system in a practical situation of the laboratory’s openhouse with which many
children participated. They were provided with our wearable systems with no
prior experiences and very few adjustment (User’s height is the only parameter
provided to the system). There were 23 participants (most of them are aged under 12 years) for this trial. Even with this situation, our systems have provided
fair estimation (2–6m of error in position) of their location and direction. In this
run of practice with some trouble of wireless network, our systems were forced
to work in dead-reckoning-only mode. But good estimation has been obtained
mainly because each participants has experienced with the system for limited
span of time. Fig. 9 shows appearance of kids playing with our system.
The participants were interviewed shortly after the experiences and asked
for comments on our system. Most of them noticed slight deviation from the

㪊㪇

Outdoor

Indoor

㪞㪧㪪㩷㫆㫅㫃㫐
㪛㪩㩷㫆㫅㫃㫐
㪦㫌㫉㩷㫄㪼㫋㪿㫆㪻

㪘㫍㪼㫉㪸㪾㪼㪻㩷㪼㫉㫉㫆㫉㩷㩿㫄㪀

㪉㪌

GPS results are used to
adjust errors in
direction/position

㪉㪇
㪈㪌

RFID adjustments
㪈㪇

Elevator detection
adjustment

㪌

GPS results are
discarded

㪇

㪇

㪌㪇

㪈㪇㪇

㪈㪌㪇

㪉㪇㪇

㪉㪌㪇

㪊㪇㪇

㪊㪌㪇

㪋㪇㪇

㪮㪸㫃㫂㫀㫅㪾㩷㪻㫀㫊㫋㪸㫅㪺㪼㩷㩿㫄㪀

Fig. 6. Averaged errors across the ﬁve subjects in distance

RFID reader #2

RFID reader #1

4m

4m

Fig. 7. Trajectories adjusted by the RFID tag system

ground truth since the detailed CG within the buildings were provided to comparison, but also commented that the deviation were not fatal for navigation.
They also reported that the map heading-up function made their location easy
to be recognized.

6

Conclusion

This paper describes the pedestrian positioning method to fuse dead-reckoning,
GPS and RFID positioning within the Kalman ﬁlter framework. Error models
of each positioning method are described in the simple equations that can be
applicable to other sources of information as for location and direction to be
integrated. The proposed method is implemented as software module with the
web-based APIs on an embedded (and wearable) computing system. Experi-

Estimated goal
Destination
on the 3rd floor

Elevator

11m

Fig. 8. The trajectories in the 3rd ﬂoor

Fig. 9. Kids playing with our pedestrian navigation system in the openhouse

mental results show that GPS and the active RFID tag system seamlessly and
eﬀectively adjust estimation errors in dead-reckoning. The pedestrian navigation
and control system are realized for multiple users and used in relatively practical situations where kids can play by the system without prior experience or
complicated calibration.

References
1. M. Kourogi and T. Kurata, “Personal positioning based on walking locomotion analysis with self-contained sensors and a wearable camera,” in Proc. of ISMAR2003,
pp. 103–112, 2003.
2. M. Kourogi and T. Kurata, “A method of personal positioning based on sensor data
fusion of wearable camera and self-contained sensors,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on
Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems (MFI2003), pp. 287–292,
2003.
3. Q. Ladetto et. al, “Two Diﬀerent Approaches for Augmented GPS Pedestrian Navigation,” in LOCELLUS2001, 2001.
4. T. Schwartz, B. Brandherm and D. Heckmann, “Calculation of the User-Direction
in an Always Best Positioned Mobile Localization System,” in Proc. AIMS2005.
5. S. W. Lee and K. Mase, “Activity and Location Recognition Using Wearable Sensors,” in IEEE Pervasive Computing, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 24–32, 2002.
6. B. W. Parkinson and J. J. Spilker, “Global Positioning System: Theory and Applications,” American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Inc., 1996.
7. B. H. Wellenhof and H. Lichtenegger and J. Collins, “Global Positioning System,
5th edition,” Springer-Verlag, 1992.

