Multisided Fairness for Recommendation
Robin Burke

arXiv:1707.00093v2 [cs.CY] 8 Jul 2017

School of Computing
DePaul University
Chicago, Illinois
rburke@cs.depaul.edu

ABSTRACT

1.1 Personalization

Recent work on machine learning has begun to consider issues of fairness. In this paper, we extend the
concept of fairness to recommendation. In particular,
we show that in some recommendation contexts, fairness may be a multisided concept, in which fair outcomes for multiple individuals need to be considered.
Based on these considerations, we present a taxonomy
of classes of fairness-aware recommender systems and
suggest possible fairness-aware recommendation architectures.

The dominant recommendation paradigm, collaborative filtering [13], uses user behavior as its input, ignoring user demographics and item attributes. However,
this does not mean that fairness is irrelevant. Consider
a recommender system suggesting job opportunities to
job seekers. An operator of such a system might wish,
for example, to ensure that male and female users with
similar qualifications get recommendations of jobs with
similar rank and salary. The system would therefore
need to defend against biases in recommendation output, even biases that might arise entirely due to behavioral differences: for example, male users might be
more likely to click optimistically on high-paying jobs.
Defeating such biases is difficult if we cannot assert a
shared global preference ranking over items. Personal
preference is the essence of recommendation especially
in areas like music, books, and movies where individual taste is paramount. Even in the employment domain, some users might prefer a somewhat lower-paying
job if it had other advantages: such as flexible hours,
shorter commute time, or better benefits. Thus, to achieve
the policy goal of fair recommendation of jobs by salary,
a site operator will have to go beyond a purely personalizationoriented approach, identify salary as the key outcome
variable, and control the recommendation algorithm
to make it sensitive to the salary distribution for protected groups.

KEYWORDS
Fairness, Recommender systems, Reciprocal recommendation

1 INTRODUCTION
Bias and fairness in machine learning are topics of considerable recent research interest [4, 6, 17]. A standard
approach in this area is to identify a variable or variables representing membership in a protected class, for
example, race in an employment context, and to develop algorithms that remove bias relative to this variable. See, for example, [11, 12, 23, 24].
To extend this concept to recommender systems, we
must recognize the key role of personalization. Inherent in the idea of recommendation is that the best items
for one user may be different than those for another. It
is also important to note that recommender systems
exist to facilitate transactions. Thus, many recommendation applications involve multiple stakeholders and
therefore may give rise to fairness issues for more than
one group of participants [1].
Presented as a poster at the 2017 Workshop on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning

1.2 Multiple stakeholders
As the example of job recommendation makes clear, a
recommender system is often in the position of facilitating a transaction between parties, such as job seeker
and prospective employer. Fairness towards both parties may be important. For example, at the same time
that the system is ensuring that male and female users
to get recommendations with similar salary distributions, it might also need to ensure that jobs at minorityowned businesses are being recommended to the most

FATML’17, August 2017, Halifax, NS, Canada

Robin Burke

with providers and has some means of gaining benefit
from successfully doing so.
Recommendation in multistakeholder settings needs
to be approached differently from user-focused environments. In particular, we have found that formalizing and computing stakeholder utilities is a productive way to design and evaluate recommendation algorithms. Ultimately, the system owner is the one whose
utility should be maximized: if there is some outcome
valued by the recommender system operator, it should
be included in the calculation of system utility.
The system inevitably has objectives that are a function of the utilities of the other stakeholders. Multisided platforms thrive when they can attract and retain
critical masses of participants on all sides of the market.
In our employment example, if a job seeker does not
find the system’s recommendations valuable, he or she
may ignore this aspect of the system or may migrate to
a competing platform. The same is true of providers; a
company may choose other platforms on which to promote its job openings if a given site does not present its
ads as recommendations or does not deliver acceptable
candidates.
System utilities are highly domain-specific: tied to
particular business models and types of transactions
that they facilitate. If there is some monetary transaction facilitated by the platform, the system will usually
get some share. The system will also have some utility
associated with customer satisfaction, and some portion of that can be attributed to providing good recommendations. In domains subject to legal regulation,
such as employment and housing, there will be value
1.3 Stakeholder utility
associated with compliance with anti-discrimination
Different recommendation scenarios can be distinguished
statutes. There may also be a (difficult to quantify) utilby differing configurations of interests among the stakeity associated with an organization’s social mission that
holders. We divide the stakeholders of a given recommay also value fair outcomes. All of these factors will
mender system into three categories: consumers C, providers
govern how the platform values the different trade-offs
P, and platform or system S. The consumers are those
associated with making recommendations.
who receive the recommendations. They are the individuals whose choice or search problems bring them to
the platform, and who expect recommendations to sat2 MULTISIDED FAIRNESS
isfy those needs. The providers are those entities that
Recommendation processes within multisided platforms
supply or otherwise stand behind the recommended
can give rise to questions of multisided fairness. Namely,
2
objects, and gain from the consumer’s choice. The fithere may be fairness-related criteria at play on more
nal category is the platform itself, which has created
than one side of a transaction, and therefore the transthe recommender system in order to match consumers
action cannot be evaluated simply on the basis of the
results that accrue to one side. There are three classes
2 In some recommendation scenarios, like on-line dating, the conof systems, distinguished by the fairness issues that
sumers and providers are same individuals.

desirable job candidates at the same rate as jobs at whiteowned businesses.
A multistakeholder recommender system is one in which
the end user is not the only party whose interests are
considered in generating recommendations [1, 5]. This
term acknowledges that recommender systems often
serve multiple goals and therefore a purely user-centered
approach is insufficient. Bilateral considerations, such
as those in employment recommendation, were first
studied in the category of reciprocal recommendation
where a recommendation must be acceptable to both
parties in a transaction [3]. Other reciprocal recommendation domains include on-line dating [18], peerto-peer “sharing economy” recommendation (such as
AirBnB, Uber and others), on-line advertising [9], and
scientific collaboration [15, 20].
When recommendations must account for the needs
of more than just the two transacting parties, we move
beyond reciprocal recommendation to multistakeholder
recommendation. Today’s web economy hosts a profusion of multisided platforms, systems of commerce
and exchange that bring together multiple parties in a
marketplace, where the transacting individuals and the
market itself all share in the transaction [8]. These platforms must by design try to satisfy multiple stakeholders. Examples include LinkedIn, which brings together
professionals, employers and recruiters; Etsy, which brings
together shoppers and small-scale artisans; and Kiva.org,
which brings together charitably-minded individuals
with third-world entrepreneurs in need of capital.

Multisided Fairness for Recommendation
arise relative to these groups: consumers (C-fairness),
providers (P-fairness), and both (CP-fairness).

2.1

C-fairness

A recommender system distinguished by C-fairness is
one that must take into account the disparate impact of
recommendation on protected classes of recommendation consumers. In the motivating example from [6], a
credit card company is recommending consumer credit
offers. There are no producer-side fairness issues since
the products are all coming from the same bank.
Multistakeholder considerations do not arise in systems of this type. A number of designs could be proposed. One intriguing possibility is to design a recommender system following the approach of [23] in generating fair classification. We could define a mapping
from each user to a prototype space, perhaps defined
in terms of latent factors extracted from the rating data.
Each prototype could be engineered to have the property of statistical parity relative to the protected class.
A key consideration in this type of system is to ensure
a bounded loss with respect to ranking accuracy for
users. We plan to explore this type of system design in
future work.

2.2

P-fairness

A system of requiring P-fairness is one in which fairness needs to be preserved for the providers only. A
good example of this kind of system is Kiva.org, online micro-finance site. Kiva aggregates loan requests
from field partners around the world who lend small
amounts of money to entrepreneurs in their local communities. The loans are funded interest-free by Kiva’s
members, largely in the United States. Kiva does not
currently offer a personalized recommendation function, but if it did, one can imagine a goal of the organization would be to preserve fair distribution of capital
across its different partners in the face of well-known
biases of users [14]. Consumers of the recommendations are essentially donors and do not receive any direct benefit from the system, so there are no fairness
considerations on the consumer side.
P-fairness may also be a consideration where there is
interest in ensuring market diversity and avoiding monopoly domination. For example, in the on-line craft
marketplace Etsy3 , the system may wish to ensure that
3 www.etsy.com

FATML’17, August 2017, Halifax, NS, Canada
new entrants to the market get a reasonable share of
recommendations even though they will have had fewer
shoppers than established vendors. This type of fairness may not be mandated by law, but is rooted instead
in the platform’s business model.
There are complexities in P-fairness systems that do
not arise in the C-fairness case. In particular, the producers in the P-fairness case are passive; they do not
seek out recommendation opportunities but rather must
wait for users to come to the system and request recommendations. Consider the employment case discussed
above. We would like it to be the case that jobs at minorityowned businesses are recommended to highly-qualified
candidates at the same rate that jobs at other types
of businesses. The opportunity for a given minorityowned business to be recommended to an appropriate
candidate may arrive only rarely and must be recognized as such. As with the C-fairness case, we will want
to bound the loss of personalization that accompanies
any promotion of protected providers.
There is considerable research in the area of diversityaware recommendation [2, 21]. Essentially, these systems treat recommendation as a multi-objective optimization problem where the goal is to maintain a certain level of accuracy, while also ensuring that recommendation lists are diverse with respect to some representation of item content. These techniques can be repurposed for P-fairness recommendation by treating
the items from the protected group as a different class
and then optimizing for diverse recommendations relative to this variable.
Note, however, that this type of solution does not
guarantee that any given item is recommended fairly,
only that recommendation lists have the requisite level
of diversity. This distinction is known as list diversity
vs catalog coverage in the recommendation literature
and as individual vs. group fairness in fairness-aware
classification [6]. List diversity can be achieved by recommending the same “diverse” items to everyone, but
does not provide a fair outcome for the whole set of
providers.
Achieving individual P-fairness / catalog coverage
requires a more dynamic model of handling recommendation opportunities. Perhaps the closest analogy is found
in on-line bidding for display advertising, where limited ad budgets serve the function of spreading impressions among competing advertisers [22]. Consider a

FATML’17, August 2017, Halifax, NS, Canada
system in which providers have a fixed budget (in artificial system currency) that can be used to bid on recommendation opportunities during a particular time period. When a user requests a set of recommendations,
appropriate recommendations are calculated, but will
only be guaranteed to be delivered to the user if the
advertiser successfully bids in a second-price auction
mechanism for the opportunity [7].
Individual P-fairness within the limitations of the
personalized mechanism is achieved in this context by
giving the protected group equal purchasing power to
the non-protected group. Assume that there are p providers
from the protected group and q other providers, with
p ≪ q. The purchasing parity rule requires that we allocate B/2p budget to each provider in the protected
class and B/2q to the other providers, where B is the
total ad budget.
Depending on the information available to each provider, the design of a bidding agent for this market
could be arbitrarily complex, but conversely, the system could make bidding agents simple to design by limiting the information about the recommendation opportunity that is available to the agents. A rational bidding approach would be to bid a quantity proportional
to the agent’s remaining budget and the candidate’s
quality and inversely proportional to the number of
future bid opportunities. This design is similar to the
BALANCE algorithm that achieves fair budget drawdown in on-line advertising [10].

2.3

CP-fairness

Finally, a multisided platform may require fairness be
considered for both consumers and suppliers: the CPfairness condition. This can arise in reciprocal recommendation or in any domain in which both consumers
and providers may belong to protected groups: the employment scenario was discussed earlier, but there are
others that we can envision. A rental property recommender may treat minority applicants as a protected
class and wish to ensure that they are recommended
properties similar to white renters. At the same time,
the recommender may wish to treat minority landlords
as a protected class and ensure that highly-qualified
tenants are referred to them at the same rate as to white
landlords.
The solutions described above are decoupled, in the
sense that a recommendation ranking that is C-fair can
be passed on to the bidding mechanism required to

Robin Burke
achieve P-fairness. One important question for future
research is how the outcomes for each stakeholder and
the overall system performance are affected by combining such solutions.

3 CONCLUSION
This paper extends ideas of fairness in classification
to personalized recommendation. A key aspect of this
extension is to note the tension between a personalized view of recommendation delivery and a regulatory view that values particular outcomes. The regulatory view is somewhat foreign to research in personalization, but there is strong argument that total obedience to user preference is not always risk-free or desirable [16, 19]. This paper also introduces the concept
of multisided fairness, relevant in multisided platforms
that serve a matchmaking function. Provider-side fairness, especially if defined at the individual level, requires an architecture sensitive to the dynamics of the
recommendation environment.
I have outlined some possible approaches to ensuring multsided fairness in recommendation. One of the
key challenges in this area is the domain-specificity of
multistakeholder environments. The utilities that are
delivered to each class of stakeholder are highly dependent on the type of item being recommended, the business model of the platform, and the interactions that it
enables. It is therefore difficult to find appropriate data
sets for experimentation and challenging to generalize
across recommendation scenarios.

4 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under grant IIS-1423368.

REFERENCES
[1] Himan Abdollahpouri, Robin Burke, and Bamshad Mobasher.
2017. Recommender Systems as Multistakeholder Environments. In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP’17). Bratislava,
Slovakia, To appear.
[2] G. Adomavicius and Y.O. Kwon. 2012. Improving aggregate
recommendation diversity using ranking-based techniques.
Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on 24, 5
(2012), 896–911.
[3] Leman Akoglu and Christos Faloutsos. 2010. Valuepick: Towards a value-oriented dual-goal recommender system. In
2010 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops.
IEEE, 1151–1158.

Multisided Fairness for Recommendation
[4] Engin Bozdag. 2013. Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization. Ethics and Information Technology 15, 3 (Sept. 2013),
209–227. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-013-9321-6
[5] Robin Burke, Himan Abdollahpouri, Bamshad Mobasher, and
Trinadh Gupta. 2016. Towards Multi-Stakeholder Utility Evaluation of Recommender Systems. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Surprise, Opposition, and Obstruction in
Adaptive and Personalized Systems (SOAP 2016). ACM, 6.
[6] Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. 2012. Fairness through awareness.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer
Science Conference. ACM, 214–226.
[7] Benjamin Edelman, Michael Ostrovsky, and Michael Schwarz.
2007. Internet advertising and the generalized second-price
auction: Selling billions of dollars worth of keywords. The
American economic review 97, 1 (2007), 242–259.
[8] David S. Evans and Richard Schmalensee. 2016. Matchmakers:
The New Economics of Multisided Platforms. Harvard Business
Review Press.
[9] Ganesh Iyer, David Soberman, and J Miguel Villas-Boas. 2005.
The targeting of advertising. Marketing Science 24, 3 (2005),
461–476.
[10] Bala Kalyanasundaram and Kirk R Pruhs. 2000. An optimal
deterministic algorithm for online b-matching. Theoretical
Computer Science 233, 1 (2000), 319–325.
[11] Faisal Kamiran, Toon Calders, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. 2010.
Discrimination aware decision tree learning. In Data Mining
(ICDM), 2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on. IEEE, 869–
874.
[12] Toshihiro Kamishima, Shotaro Akaho, Hideki Asoh, and Jun
Sakuma. 2012. Fairness-Aware Classifier with Prejudice Remover Regularizer. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 35–50. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33486-3_3
[13] Y. Koren and R. Bell. 2011. Advances in collaborative filtering.
Recommender Systems Handbook (2011), 145–186.
[14] Eric L Lee, Jing-Kai Lou, Wei-Ming Chen, Yen-Chi Chen,
Shou-De Lin, Yen-Sheng Chiang, and Kuan-Ta Chen. 2014.
Fairness-Aware Loan Recommendation for Microfinance Services. In Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on
Social Computing. ACM, 3.
[15] Giseli Rabello Lopes, Mirella M Moro, Leandro Krug Wives,
and José Palazzo Moreira De Oliveira. 2010. Collaboration recommendation on academic social networks. In International
Conference on Conceptual Modeling. Springer, 190–199.
[16] Eli Pariser. 2011. The filter bubble: How the new personalized
web is changing what we read and how we think. Penguin, New
York.
[17] Dino Pedreshi, Salvatore Ruggieri, and Franco Turini. 2008.
Discrimination-aware data mining. In Proceedings of the 14th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining. ACM, 560–568.
[18] Luiz Pizzato, Tomek Rej, Thomas Chung, Irena Koprinska,
and Judy Kay. 2010. RECON: a reciprocal recommender for
online dating. In Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on
Recommender systems. ACM, 207–214.

FATML’17, August 2017, Halifax, NS, Canada
[19] Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Republic. com 2.0. Princeton University
Press.
[20] Jie Tang, Sen Wu, Jimeng Sun, and Hang Su. 2012. Crossdomain collaboration recommendation. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 1285–1293.
[21] Saúl Vargas and Pablo Castells. 2011. Rank and Relevance
in Novelty and Diversity Metrics for Recommender Systems.
In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Recommender
Systems (RecSys ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 109–116.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2043932.2043955
[22] Shuai Yuan, Ahmad Zainal Abidin, Marc Sloan, and Jun Wang.
2012. Internet Advertising: An Interplay among Advertisers, Online Publishers, Ad Exchanges and Web Users. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1206.1754 (2012), 44.
[23] Rich Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toni Pitassi, and Cynthia
Dwork. 2013. Learning fair representations. In Proceedings of
the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML13). 325–333.
[24] Lu Zhang and Xintao Wu. 2017. Anti-discrimination learning:
a causal modeling-based framework. International Journal of
Data Science and Analytics (May 2017), 1–16.

