Ethics Inf Technol (2013) 15:209–227
DOI 10.1007/s10676-013-9321-6

ORIGINAL PAPER

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization
Engin Bozdag

Published online: 23 June 2013
 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013

Abstract Online information intermediaries such as
Facebook and Google are slowly replacing traditional
media channels thereby partly becoming the gatekeepers of
our society. To deal with the growing amount of information on the social web and the burden it brings on the
average user, these gatekeepers recently started to introduce personalization features, algorithms that filter information per individual. In this paper we show that these
online services that filter information are not merely
algorithms. Humans not only affect the design of the
algorithms, but they also can manually influence the filtering process even when the algorithm is operational. We
further analyze filtering processes in detail, show how
personalization connects to other filtering techniques, and
show that both human and technical biases are present in
today’s emergent gatekeepers. We use the existing literature on gatekeeping and search engine bias and provide a
model of algorithmic gatekeeping.
Keywords Information politics  Bias  Social filtering 
Algorithmic gatekeeping

Introduction
Information load is a growing problem in today’s digitalized world. As the networked media environment
increasingly permeates private and public life, users create
their own enormous trails of data by for instance communicating, buying, sharing or searching. The rapid and
E. Bozdag (&)
Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5015, 2600 GA Delft,
The Netherlands
e-mail: v.e.bozdag@tudelft.nl

extensive travelling of news, information and commentary
makes it very difficult for an average user to select the
relevant information. This creates serious risk to everything
from personal and financial health to vital information that
is needed for fundamental democratic processes. In order to
deal with the increasing amounts of (social) information
produced on the web, information intermediaries such as
Facebook and Google started to introduce personalization
features: algorithms that tailor information based on what
the user needs, wants and who he knows on the social web.
The consequence of such personalization is that results in a
search engine differ per user and two people with the same
friends in a social network might see different updates and
information, based on their past interaction with the system. This might create a monoculture, in which users get
trapped in their ‘‘filter bubble’’ or ‘‘echo chambers’’
(Sunstein 2002, 2006; Pariser 2011b). Social media platforms, search and recommendation engines affect what a
daily user sees and does not see. As knowledge, commerce,
politics and communication move online, these information
intermediaries are becoming emergent gatekeepers of our
society, a role which once was limited to the journalists of
the traditional media.
The gatekeeping process is studied extensively by
multiple disciplines, including media studies, sociology
and management. Gatekeeping theory addresses traditional
media bias: how certain events are being treated more
newsworthy than others and how institutions or influential
individuals determine which information passes to the
receivers (Smith et al. 2001). Gatekeeping theory does
address the rising power of online information intermediaries, but it focuses on two things: (a) the increasing role of
the audience in which users can determine what is newsworthy through social networks (b) the changing role of the
journalist, from a gatekeeper to a gatewatcher (Bruns 2008;

123

210

Shoemaker and Vos 2009). The existing theory often
considers the online information intermediaries themselves
as neutral or treats a web service only as an algorithm,
operating without human bias (Hermida 2012; Lasorsa
et al. 2012; Bruns 2011). Because these information
intermediaries automate their core operations, often, mistakenly, they are treated as objective and credible.
Machines, not humans, appear to make the crucial decisions, creating the impression the algorithms avoid selection and description biases inherent in any human-edited
media.
Several authors have shown that computer systems can
also contain biases. Friedman and Nissenbaum (1996)
show that software can systematically and unfairly discriminate against certain individuals or groups of individuals in favor of others. Bias can manifest itself in a
computer system in different ways; pre-existing bias in
society can affect the system design, technical bias can
occur due to technical limitations, emergent bias can arise
sometime after software implementation is completed and
released (Friedman and Nissenbaum 1996). Several authors
have shown how search engines can contain technical
biases, especially in coverage, indexing and ranking (Van
Couvering 2007; Diaz 2008; Mowshowitz and Kawaguchi
2002; Vaughan and Thelwall 2004; Witten 2007). However, these works are only focusing on the popularity bias.
As we will show, many other factors can cause bias in
online services.
In this paper we show that online services that process
(social) data are not merely algorithms; they are complex
systems composed of human operators and technology.
Contrary to popular belief, humans do not only take part in
developing them, but they also affect the way they work
once implemented. Most of the factors that cause human
bias in traditional media still play a role in online social
media. Finally, even though personalization is seen as a
solution by some to prevent technical biases that exist in
non-personalized online services (Goldman 2005), we
show that personalization not only introduces new biases,
but it also does not eliminate all of the existing ones.
Others have already pointed to the dangers of implicit and
explicit personalization in online services and traditional
media (Katz 1996; Van der Hof and Prins 2008; Sunstein
2002; Pariser 2011b). However, they do not identify the
potential sources of bias, processes and factors that might
cause particular biases. They also do not connect this
debate to existing literature in gatekeeping and search
engine bias. Our descriptive model of algorithmic gatekeeping aims to achieve this. As Goldman (2011) has
recently written about search engine bias: ‘‘competitive
jostling has overtaken much of the discussion. It has
become almost impossible to distinguish legitimate discourse from economic rent-seeking’’. This overview of bias

123

E. Bozdag

will hopefully serve as a reference point and contribute to
further rational discussion.
Friedman and Nissenbaum (1996) argue that technical
bias places the demand on a designer to look beyond the
features internal to a system and envision it in a context of
use. Minimizing bias asks designers to envision not only a
system’s intended situation of use, but to account for
increasingly diverse social contexts of use. Designers should
then reasonably anticipate probable contexts of use and
design for these. If it is not possible to design for extended
contexts of use, designers should attempt to articulate constraints on the appropriate contexts of a system’s use. We
believe that our detailed model will help designers and policy
makers to anticipate these probable contexts of use and
formulate scenarios where bias can occur.
The paper is structured as follows: In ‘‘Information
overload and the rise of the filters’’, section we give
background information to the problem. In ‘‘Personalization: a technical overview’’, section we give a summary of
personalization and how it poses unique problems. In ‘‘A
model of Filtering for Online Web Services’’, section we
introduce a model of algorithmic and human filtering for
online web services including personalization. In ‘‘Discussion’’, section we discuss implications for ethical
analysis, social network analysis and design. ‘‘Conclusion’’
section concludes this paper and lists several questions for
future research.

Information overload and the rise of the filters
According to Cisco, in 2015, the amount of consumer
generated data on the Internet will be four times as large as
it was in 2010 (Cisco 2011). McKinkey’s research shows
that ‘‘big data’’ is a growing torrent. In 2010, 30 billion
pieces of content were shared every month with 5 billion
mobile phones contributing to it (Manyika et al. 2011). An
IBM study reports that every 2 days we create as much
digital data as all the data (digital or non-digital) that was
created before 2003 and 90 % of the information in the
world today has been created in the last 2 years alone (IBM
2011). In online (social) services, users actively contribute
explicit data such as information about themselves, their
friends, or about the items they purchased. These data go
far beyond the click-and-search data that characterized the
first decade of the web. Today, thanks to the advent of
cloud computing, users can outsource their computing
needs to third parties and online services can offer software
as a service by storing and processing data cheaply. This
shifts the online world to a model of collaboration and
continuous data creation, creating so-called ‘‘big data’’,
data which cannot be processed and stored in traditional
computing models (Manyika et al. 2011).

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

Even though the amount of generated data on the social
web has increased exponentially, our capabilities for
absorbing of this information have not increased. Because
the mind’s information processing capacity is biologically
limited (for example, we possess neither infinite nor photographic memory), we get the feeling of being overwhelmed
by the number of choices and end up with ‘‘bounded rationality’’ (Hilbert 2012). Researchers across various disciplines have found that the performance (i.e., the quality of
decisions or reasoning in general) of an individual correlates
positively with the amount of information he or she receives,
up to a certain point. If further information is provided
beyond this point, the performance of the individual will
rapidly decline (Eppler and Mengis 2004).
One means of managing information overload is through
accessing value-added information—information that has
been collected, processed, filtered, and personalized for
each individual user in some way (Lu 2007). Lu argues that
people rely on social networks for a sense of belonging and
interpersonal sources are recognized as more credible and
reliable, more applicable, and can add value through
intermediate processing and evaluation to reduce information overload. The general public prefers personal
contacts for information acquisition (Lu 2007). As most of
the data is produced and stored in the cloud, users delegate
the filtering authority to cloud services. Cloud services are
trying to extract value and insight from the vast amount of
data available, and fine-tune it in order to show what is
relevant to their users, often using the users’ interpersonal
contacts and social networks.
For instance, a search engine returns a list of resources
depending on the submitted user query. When the same
query was submitted by different users, traditional search
engines used to return the same results regardless of who
submitted the query. In general, each user has different
information needs for their query. The user then had to
browse through the results in order to find what is relevant
for him. In order to decrease this ‘‘cognitive overstimulation’’ on the user side, many cloud services are exploring
the use of personalized applications that tailor the information presented to individual users based upon their
needs, desires, and recently on who they know in online
social networks. Personalized systems address the overstimulation problem by building, managing, and representing information customized for individual users.
Online services achieve this by building a user model that
captures the beliefs and knowledge that the system has
about the user (Gauch et al. 2007). In this way the system
can predict what will be relevant for the user, filtering out
the irrelevant information, increasing relevance and
importance to an individual user.
Google uses various ‘‘signals’’ in order to personalize
searches including location, previous search keywords and

211

recently contacts in a user’s social network (Google 2012).
As Fig. 1 shows, different users receive different results
based on the same keyword search. Facebook on the other
hand registers the user’s interactions with other users, the
so-called ‘‘social gestures’’. These gestures include like,
share, subscribe and comment (Upbin 2011). When the
user interacts with the system by consuming a set of
information, the system registers this user interaction history. Later, on the basis of this interaction history, certain
information is filtered out. For instance content produced
by certain friends might be hidden from the user, because
the user did not interact with those friends over a period of
time. Further, photos and videos receive a higher ranking
than regular status posts and some posts receive a higher
ranking than others (Techcrunch 2011). Personalization
algorithms thus control the incoming information (user
does not see everything available), but also determine the
outgoing information and who the user can reach (not
everything shared by the user will be visible to others).
Personalization is a kind of information filtering. However, filtering is not a new concept. During our daily lives
we filter information ourselves or delegate the filtering
authority to experts, who are called gatekeepers (Priestley
1999). This is because it would require an unreasonable
effort and time for any individual to audit all the available
information. The gatekeeper controls whether information
passes through the channel and what its final outcome is,
which in turn determines the way we define our lives and
the world around us, affecting the social reality of every
person. Traditional media is used to perform this ‘‘gatekeeping’’ role for news, determining what is newsworthy
and important for its audience. However, as information
technology and cloud computing are gaining importance,
online web services that we use every day are slowly taking
over the gatekeeping process that used to be performed by
the traditional media.
According to Hoven and Rooksby (2008), information is
a Rawlsian ‘‘primary good’’, a good that everybody
requires as a condition for well-being. Information objects
are means to the acquisition of knowledge and in order to
be an autonomous person to plan a rational life, we need
information (Pariser 2011b). The more (relevant) data
individuals can access in their planning, the more rational
their life plan will be. Access to information is, then, a
value because it may be instrumental in adding alternatives
to one’s choice set, or in ruling out alternatives as
unavailable. As a requirement of justice, in high-technology information societies, people should be educated in the
use of information technologies, and have affordable
access to information media sufficient for them to be able
to participate in their society’s common life. Bagdikian
(2004) similarly argues that media power is political power
and the power to control the flow of information is a major

123

212
Fig. 1 Effects of
personalization on Google. First
screenshot is with a logged in
user from Netherlands. Second
screenshot is from an
anonymous user from
Netherlands. Last screenshot is
from a logged in user from the
US

123

E. Bozdag

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

213

factor in the control of society. Giving citizens a choice in
ideas and information is as important as giving them choice
in politics.
In 2005, the Pew Internet and American Life Project
reported on the rise of search engines, and surveyed users’
knowledge of how they worked. It concluded that ‘‘search
engines are attaining the status of other institutions—legal,
medical, educational, governmental, journalistic—whose
performance the public judges by unusually high standards,
because the public is unusually reliant on them for principled performance’’ (Fallows 2005). Personalization and
other forms of algorithmic filtering are thus ‘‘replacing the
traditional repositories that individuals and organizations
turn to for the information needed to solve problems and
make decisions’’ (Mowshowitz and Kawaguchi 2002). The
services that employ such algorithms are gateways that act
as intermediaries between information sources and information seekers. They play a vital role in how people plan
and live their lives. Since access to information is a value,
and online filters allow or block access to information,
building these algorithms is not only a technical matter, but
a political one as well. Before discussing how bias can
manifest itself in personalization, it is important to first
understand how personalization works.

Personalization: a technical overview
Most personalization systems are based on some type of user
profile, a data instance of a user model that is applied to
adaptive interactive systems. User profiles may include
demographic information, (e.g., name, age, country, education level), and may also represent the interests or preferences of either a group of users or a single person. In general,
the goal of user profiling is to collect information about the
subjects in which a user is interested, and the length of time
over which they have exhibited this interest, in order to
improve the quality of information access and infer the user’s
intentions. As shown in Fig. 2, the user profiling process
generally consists of three main phases. First, an information
collection process is used to gather raw information about the
user. Depending on the information collection process
selected, different types of user data can be extracted. The
Explicit
Info
Profile
Constructor

Data
Collection

Technology or
application

Implicit
Info

User

Personalized
services

Fig. 2 User profile construction for personalization (adapted from
Gauch et al. 2007)

second phase focuses on the construction of a user profile on
basis of the user data. Here the collected and stored data are
analyzed and processed. In the final phase, the compiled user
profile is used in the actual web service, for instance a customized newsfeed in a social networking site, personalized
results in a search engine query, or recommended products in
an e-commerce site.
A system can build a user profile in two ways:
•

•

Explicitly: the user customizes the information source
himself. The user can register his interests or demographic information before the personalization starts.
The user can also rate topics of interest.
Implicitly: the system determines what the user is
interested in through various factors, including web
usage mining (i.e., previous interaction with the system
such as clickthroughs, browsing history, previous
queries, time spend reading information about a
product), IP address, cookies, session id’s, etc.

Explicit user information collection will allow the user
to know that the personalization is taking place and he can
tailor it to his needs. However, one problem with explicit
feedback is that it places an additional burden on the user.
Because of this, or because of privacy concerns, the user
may not choose to participate. It is also known that users
may not accurately report their own interests or demographic data, or, since the profile remains static whereas the
user’s interests may change over time (Gauch et al. 2007).
Implicit user information collection, on the other hand,
does not require any additional intervention by the user
during the process of constructing profiles. It also automatically updates as the user interacts with the system. One
drawback of implicit feedback techniques is that they can
typically only capture positive feedback. When a user
clicks on an item or views a page, it seems reasonable to
assume that this indicates some user interest in the item.
However, it is not clear that when a user fails to examine
some data item it is an indication of disinterest (Gauch
et al. 2007).
Different techniques can be used to make suggestions to
users on which information is relevant for them. Recommendation systems try to analyze how a user values certain
products or services and then predict what the user will be
interested in next. A recommendation mechanism typically
does not use an explicit query but rather analyses the user
context (e.g., what the user has recently purchased or read,
and, if available, a user profile (e.g., the user likes mystery
novels). Then the recommendation mechanism presents to
the user one or more descriptions of objects (e.g., books,
people, movies) that may be of interest (Adomavicius et al.
2005; Garcia-Molina et al. 2011).
If this recommendation is done solely by analyzing the
associations between the user’s past choices and the

123

214

E. Bozdag

descriptions of new objects, then it is called ‘‘content-based
filtering’’. Due to increasing user collaboration and usergenerated content, personalization can also be done
socially. The so-called social information filtering
(Shardanand and Maes 1995) or collaborative filtering
(Garcia-Molina et al. 2011) automates the process of
‘‘word-of-mouth’’ recommendations: items are recommended to a user based upon values assigned by other
people with similar taste. The system determines which
users have similar taste via standard formulas for computing statistical correlations (Shardanand and Maes 1995).
For instance, Facebook uses a collaborative filtering called
Edgerank, which adds a weight to produced user stories
(i.e. links, images, comments) and relationships between
people (Techcrunch 2011). Depending on interaction
among people, the site determines whether or not the
produced story is displayed in a particular user’s newsfeed.
This way, a produced story by a user will not be seen by
everyone in that user’s contact list. All stories produced by
user X can be completely hidden in user Y’s newsfeed,
without the knowledge of both users.
According to Chatman (1987) and Lu (2007), people’s
information needs are highly diversified and individualized,
making applicable and value-laden information most desirable, and yet the hardest to obtain. Interpersonal sources can,
to a great extent, minimize these difficulties and maximize
the utility of information. Even though personalization
technologies such as Grouplens (Resnick et al. 1994) have
existed for a while, the rise of social networks and the
exponential increase in produced and shared information in
online services are changing the impact this technology has.
According to Garcia-Molina et al. (2011), information providing mechanisms (e.g. search engines) and personalization
systems have developed separately from each other. Personalization systems like recommendation engines were
restricted to a single homogenous domain that allowed no
keyword search. Search engines on the other hand were
geared toward satisfying keyword search with little or no
emphasis on personalization or identification of intent. These
two systems were separated partly due to a lack of infrastructure. Today, due to a combination of a powerful and
cheap back-end infrastructure such as cloud computing and
better algorithms, search engines return results extremely
fast, and there is now the potential for a further improvement
in the relevancy of search results. So, we now see a trend
where personalization and information providing mechanisms are blending.

gatewatcher (Shoemaker and Vos 2009; Bruns 2008). With
the increasing popularity of the online media and social
networks, every user can share information depending on
what he thinks is important. Scholars thus argue that by
using online services, the audience can exert a greater
control over news selection and can focus on issues that
they consider more relevant, which in turn empowers
audiences and erodes the degree of editorial influence over
the public’s issue agenda (Althaus and Tewksbury 2002).
Some even argue that the gatekeeping role performed by
the traditional media becomes irrelevant; gates are disappearing (Levinson 1999). Information may diffuse through
social networks next to mass media channels; therefore any
audience member can be a gatekeeper for others. Journalists now become a ‘‘gatewatcher’’, providing a critical
analysis of existing topics that are chosen by the community (Bruns 2008).
Some also claim that the platforms the new ‘‘gatewatchers’’ operate are neutral. According to Bruns (2011),
tools such as Twitter are neutral spaces for collaborative
news coverage and curation operated by third parties outside the journalism industry. As a result, the information
curated through collaborative action on such social media
platforms should be expected to be drawn from a diverse,
multiperspectival range of sources. Also Lasorsa et al.
(2012) claim that platforms such as Twitter are neutral
communication spaces, and offer a unique environment in
which journalists are free to communicate virtually anything to anyone, beyond many of the natural constraints
posed by organizational norms that are existing in traditional media.
However, as we shall show, the gatekeeping process in
online information services is more than a simple transition
from editor selection to audience selection or from biased
human decisions to neutral computerized selections. We
argue that human factors play a role not only in the
development of algorithms, but in their use as well. We
show that factors that caused bias in mass media news
selection still play a role in information selection in online
web services. Online information intermediaries, similar to
the traditional media, can control the diffusion of information for millions of people, a fact that gives them
extraordinary political and social power. They do not
provide equal channels for every user and they are prone to
biases. Just as any computer system, they can unfairly
discriminate against certain individuals or groups of individuals in favor of others (Friedman and Nissenbaum
1996).

A model of filtering for online web services

Source selection algorithm

Existing work on gatekeeping theory often points out the
changing role of the journalist from a gatekeeper to a

At the stage of ‘‘Collection and Selection’’ (Fig. 3), the
online service starts to collect its information from various

123

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

215

Fig. 3 A model of filtering for
online web services including
personalization

sources. For instance a search engine will automatically
crawl the web, while the social network site will collect
information produced by its users. However, similar to the
traditional media where gatekeeping starts with journalists
(Chibnall 1975; Shoemaker et al. 2008), algorithmic gatekeeping already starts at source selection. First of all, not
all information is digital, thus all non-digital information
will be absent from online information intermediaries.
Further, not all digitally available information will be
available to each service, for instance search engines do not
index all the data available on the Internet, leading to
coverage bias (Goldman 2005; Vaughan and Thelwall
2004). Google admits that the company does not index

every one of the trillion pages on the web, because they are
similar to each other or because Google considers some of
them not useful to the searcher (Google 2008). Technical
reasons can also prevent a search engine to crawl a site.
The design of the website might make the source collection
and indexing process difficult or the site itself might be
explicitly blocking the crawling process (Barzilai-Nahon
2008). Further, if a resource has a bad reputation, for
instance if it is suspected as an illegal site, it might be left
out of the whole collection process. It is also possible that
the source does not want to be included in the index due to
various reasons. For instance not every page in Facebook
or Twitter is indexable by Google. (Sullivan 2012).

123

216

Information selection and prioritization algorithm
In traditional media, newspaper editors select some of the
messages produced by journalist to make news (BarzilaiNahon 2009). Algorithms used in web services (such as
ranking algorithm in a search engine, or news feed algorithm in a social network) make similar decisions. The
design of these algorithms is affected by choices made by
designers, i.e., which factors to include in the algorithm,
and how to weigh them.1 To serve majority interests,
information intermediaries often include popularity metric
in their ranking algorithm. A search algorithm for instance
can give more weight to information coming from popular
websites, to support majority interests and values. As a
result, seekers will have trouble finding the less popular
and smaller sites (Nissenbaum and Introna 2000).
Because the information filtering is automated, it might
be manipulated by activities from third parties. This happens with the so-called ‘‘black-hat’’ search engine optimization techniques. This is a method of raising the profile of
a Web site with methods that Google considers tantamount
to cheating (Segal 2011). Another factor is own product/
service prioritization. The EU recently received a complaint from a shopping search site that claimed it and other
similar sites saw their traffic drop after Google began
promoting its own services above conventional search
results (Foundem 2009; Efrati 2010; Albanesius 2011;
Edelman 2011). Google also integrates content from its
social networking platform Google Plus into Google search
results, causing protest by the social networking platform
Twitter (Searchenginewatch 2012). Studies also showed
that Google and Bing search engines both reference their
own content in its first results position when no other
engine does (Wright 2011; Edelman 2011). Facebook is
criticized for favoring the products of its partners (Fong
2011). The algorithm can also prioritize certain types of
information over others. For instance, it is claimed that
Facebook treats video and pictures as more important than
links and status updates (Taylor 2011). Similarly, comments on an item are four times more valuable than ‘‘likes’’
(Wittman 2011).
In traditional media, regardless of the size of an event
such as a public protest, the likelihood that the event will
be reported in the media will depend on the current agenda.
This is because both print and electronic media regularly
focus upon selected issues over a sequence of days, creating the phenomena of ‘‘issue attention cycles’’ (Smith
1

For instance, Facebook uses an algorithm called Edgerank to
determine how a newsfeed of a user is constructed. It is believed that
several factors are used to select/prioritize user updates, such as
affinity between the receiver and sender, and the date of the published
update. However, the exact formula is unknown. See Techcrunch
(2011).

123

E. Bozdag

et al. 2001). We can observe similar behavior in social
media. Twitter has a feature called trending topic (TT), in
which most popular topics Twitter users are talking about
in a particular location are highlighted. However Twitter
does not solely check popularity of an item while determining TT’s, it favors novelty over popularity. Twitter
checks if the user updates on a specific topic is increasing
quickly enough. Even if a topic is large volume wise, if the
increase rate is small or if it is not novel, it won’t make it to
the ‘‘trending topics’’ (Twitter 2010). This means that it is
much easier for a term never seen before to become a
Twitter trend and the longer a term stays in the TT list, the
higher velocity required to keep it there (Lotan 2011). This
novelty factor caused the hashtag ‘‘IcantRespectYouIf’’ to
be a TT in the US, while #OccupyWallStreet not making it
to the list. This is because when #OccupyWallStreet was a
TT throughout the world, it had previously trended in the
US, and now there were no more new people in the US
talking about it.
According to Gillespie (2012), this choice fosters a
public more attuned to the ‘‘new’’ than to the discussion of
persistent problems, to viral memes more than to slowbuilding political movements. The exact algorithm that
determines the trending topics is unknown and this opacity
makes the TT, and their criteria, deeply and fundamentally
open to interpretation and suspicion (Gillespie 2012).
Trending topic differs in important ways from those
employed in personalization, as it presents itself as a
measure of popularity.2 However, since algorithms such as
TT can differ per country, region or city, they might be
used to customize content, as an important signal. Popularity can thus be an input to customize items for a group of
users. This is still tailored content, but not for an individual, but for a group of individuals.
Finally, the age of an information source or the age of
the information item can also matter. In Google search
engine, the number of years a domain name is registered
has an impact on search ranking; domain names that exist
for a period of time are preferred over newly registered
ones (Jacobs 2010). In Facebook, the longer a status update
has been out there, the less weight it carries. A news item is
prioritized over an old item (Techcrunch 2011). This might
for instance lead companies to post updates when their
audience is most likely to be online and using Facebook.
Human operator
In traditional media, individual factors such as personal
judgment can play a role during the selection of news items
for a newspaper. An editor’s decisions can be highly
2

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers to point out this
fact.

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

subjective and can be based on the gatekeeper’s own set of
experiences, attitudes and expectations, leading to a
selection bias (Gans 2005). Online web services such as
search engines frequently claim that such human bias do
not exist in their systems. They claim that their core
operations are completely automated, but this is false.
Humans in online services also make editorial judgments
about what data to collect delete or disregard. According to
Goldman, online services manually inspect their index and
make adjustments (Goldman 2005). For instance search
engines make manual adjustments of a web publisher’s
overall rating or modify search results presented in
response to particular keyword searches (Goldman 2005).
The Dutch newspaper Trouw’s entire domain name and all
hosted pages were removed from Google index because of
a violation of the company policy (Groot 2004; Dekker
2006). Google itself has admitted that the company manually demotes websites (Metz 2011a). Similar to blacklisting, search engines can also perform whitelisting. For
instance Google recently mentioned that it uses whitelists
to manually override its search algorithms (Metz 2011b).
Information deletion or withholding is not specific to
search engines. Facebook a photo of two men kissing from
a user’s Wall due to a violation of the site’s terms of service (Zimmer 2011). There are also claims that Facebook
denies and removes advertisements designed for gay
audience with no nudity or sexual content, labeling it
‘‘inappropriate’’ (Accuracast 2010). Others claimed that
Facebook labeled their posts containing links to a political
activism site as spam and prevented the users disseminating this information (Badash 2011). Facebook has also
removed pages because of offensive content, but later
reinstated them (Kincaid 2010; Ingram 2011). Facebook
spokesman blamed the human reviewer in some of the
cases, but did not reveal the criteria the company uses on
what makes content offensive or in violation with the
company’s terms of use. Twitter similarly removes certain
‘trending topics‘ if it considers it as ‘‘offensive’’ (Costolo
2011).
Scholars in media studies argued that organizational
factors in traditional media play a more important role than
individual judgments. In the uncertainty of what tomorrow’s news will be, journalists use so-called routines,
patterned, repeated practices and forms, to view and judge
in order to define news as predictable events (Fishman
1988). Similarly, online web services employ operators to
delete, withhold or disregard information, to enforce
company guidelines. Even though these operators have to
obey a set of rules to apply, they have, just like journalists,
their own values and can pass personal judgments. This
might give the image that the operator is bound to strict
rules, and acts merely as an enforcer. However people do
not always execute rules in the same way and individual-

217

level characteristics are still important (Shoemaker and
Vos 2009).
Human operators of online services have to evaluate
removal requests coming from governments. For instance,
recently, A Delhi Court ordered 22 social networking sites
(including Facebook, Google, Yahoo and Microsoft) to
remove all ‘‘anti-religious’’ or ‘‘anti-social’’ content and
file compliance reports. Google has a list of content
removal requests from governments all around the world
(Google 2011). Operators also have to deal with requests
coming from third parties. For example, Google regularly
removes content due to copyright claims coming under the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, Section 512(c). This act
gives providers immunity from liability for their users’
copyright infringement, if they remove material when a
complaint is received (Chilling effects 2005).
Personalization algorithm
According to Goldman (2005), personalized ranking algorithms reduce the effects of technical bias introduced by
algorithms in online intermediaries. Goldman argues that
personalization algorithms increase relevancy and produce
a different output per individual user. This in turn diminishes the weight given to popularity-based metrics and
reduces the structural biases due to popularity. Personalization might increase relevance, however as we show in
this subsection, designing only for this value will introduce
problems.
User interaction history and user preferences
As we have argued in ‘‘Personalization: a technical overview’’, section users could personalize the information they
receive by giving their preferences explicitly. In this way
they can receive personalized information on the criteria
they know. However, if the user’s interests change over the
time and if the user does not update their filter, they might
miss some information that might be of interest to her.
Lavie et al. (2009) found that people might be interested in
things that they did not know they were interested in, due
to the formulation of the topic. Some users have asserted
that they were not interested in politics, but later it was
shown that their perception of ‘‘politics’’ was limited to
local politics. They later have shown interest in international politics (Lavie et al. 2009). Lavie et al. argue that,
overall, users cannot accurately assess their interests in
news topics. Similarly Tewksbury (2003) reports that
user’s declared and actual interests may differ.
In his book Republic.com, Sunstein (2002) developed
his concern that explicit personalization will assist us to
avoid facts and opinions with which we disagree, leading
people to join online groups that conform with their

123

218

existing beliefs. Since democracy is most effective when
citizens have accurate beliefs and to form such beliefs,
individuals must encounter information that will sometimes contradict their preexisting views. Sunstein argues
that explicit personalization will undermine deliberative
democracy by limiting contradictory information.
Implicit personalization using user interaction history
has its own concerns. Pariser (2011b) argues that online
services can cause citizens to be ill-informed about current
events and may have increasingly idiosyncratic perceptions
about the importance of current events and political issues.
This might occur because online services are trying to
improve accuracy at the expense of serendipity, leading to
what Pariser calls ‘‘filter bubble’’. Even if users wanted to
diversify their network explicitly, information intermediaries silently filter out what they assume the user does not
want to see, hiding information posted by opposite end of
political spectrum. For Sunstein, explicit excessive personalization leads to never seeing the other side of an
argument and thus fostering an ill-informed political discourse. For Pariser, excessive implicit personalization
leads to an unhealthy distaste for the unfamiliar. The
problem is thus an automatic cyberbalkanization, not an
‘‘opt-in’’ one. It happens behind the scenes and we do not
know what we are not seeing. We may miss the views and
voices that challenge our own thinking.
Pariser argues that online personalization algorithms are
designed to amplify confirmation bias, Consuming information that conforms to our beliefs is easy and pleasurable;
consuming information that challenges us to think differently or question our assumptions is difficult. Pariser notes
that we all have internal battles between our aspirational
selves (who want greater diversity) and our current selves
(who often want something easy to consume). Pariser
argues that the filter bubbles edit out our aspirational selves
when we need a mix of both. Pariser believes that the
algorithmic gatekeepers need to show us things that are not
only easy to consume but also things that are challenging,
important and uncomfortable and present competing points
of view. Pariser states that filter bubbles disconnect us from
our ‘‘ideal selves’’, that version of ourselves that we want
to be in the long-run, but that we struggle to act on quickly
when making impulse decisions.
Location
As we have shown in ‘‘Personalization: a technical overview’’, section content can also be personalized based on
location. Large web-search engines have been ‘‘personalizing’’ search to some extent for years. Users in the UK will
get different results searching for certain terms, especially
commercial ones, than users in the US Results can change
between different cities as well (Garcia-Molina et al.

123

E. Bozdag

2011). The idea is that the user will be more interested in
local content. However, this will depend on context of
information. For instance, if I am looking for a restaurant, I
would want my search engine to personalize results based
on location, the system should show me pizzerias in Rotterdam, but not in New York. However, if I am looking for
some technical information in a forum to solve a PC
problem, then I do not necessarily care about the location
(if I can speak multiple languages). Currently, most personalization systems filter information based on location
without taking the context into the account. This might
always favor local content, even if the quality or the relevance of the local content is inferior to a non-local content.
Audiences
While traditional news media outlets want to satisfy their
readers and viewers, it is much more difficult for them to
modify their selection criteria in real time, than it is for
online gatekeepers. Online gatekeepers have immediate
feedback about what queries are issued, what content is
selected and what sites are accessed. For instance online
services can observe user behavior through entered queries
or clicked links to modify its algorithms accordingly.
However, online services can also capture user’s intent by
using social gestures. Examples of these social gestures
include the ‘‘like’’ and ‘‘subscribe’’ buttons in Facebook
and the ‘‘?1’’ button in Google search. By clicking on
these buttons users express their interests and see what item
is popular. Google currently does not use these (anonymous) votes to personalize search results, but such
approaches are well known in computer science literature.
Search behavior of communities of like-minded users can
be harnessed and shared to adapt the results of a conventional search engine according to the needs and preferences
of a particular community (Smyth 2007). Because similarities will exist among community members’ search
patterns and web search is a repetitive and regular activity,
a collaborative search engine can be devised. This human
PageRank or ‘‘social-graph’’, using ?1 results to give
context to the popularity of a page, can be a supplement (or
alternative) to the link graph Google is currently using.
Some claim that the community is wiser than the individual. However, community driven filtering has its own
problems. For example, in social news aggregator Reddit,
where anonymous users submit links to items, comment on
them, vote on the submitted items and comments, the
community determines what is newsworthy, for every
topic. Users can personalize their news feed by explicitly
subscribing to certain subtopics, but the popularity metric
is used in every subtopic. In Reddit, the timing of the story
submission is important. If a good news item is submitted
outside of Internet prime-times, it will not receive enough

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

votes to make it to the front page. The result is that most
submissions that originate in the US end up being dominated by US comments, since new comments posted several hours after the first will go straight to the middle of the
pile, which most viewers will never get to. Submission
time has a big impact on the ranking and the algorithm will
rank newer stories higher than older. In Reddit, first votes
also score higher than the rest. The first 10 upvotes count as
high as the next 100, e.g. a story that has 10 upvotes and a
story that has 50 upvotes will have a similar ranking.
Controversial stories that get similar amounts of upvotes
and downvotes will get a low ranking compared to stories
that mainly get upvotes (Salihefendic 2010). Further, the
user will receive positive or negative points on the story he
submitted. The individual might remove the story due to
decreasing points in his reputation.
It is also known that in such vote-based social news
sites, the amount of contacts or followers one has can also
determine whether his story will make it to the front page.
Having a large number of contacts will make it easier to
reach the front page (more friends, more votes). Also, some
social news aggregators divide the stories into topics. If a
topic has a small number of subscribers, the chance that it
will make it to front page is small (Klein 2011). Even the
items that do not make it to the front page will bring traffic
to the submitted site. Therefore social news aggregators
like Reddit are being used and manipulated by online
marketing professionals, in order to draw more traffic to
their products or services. Similarly, Facebook’s like button can also be gamed. Digital marketing companies can
create fake users and buy ‘‘friends’’ and ‘‘likes’’ (Tynan
2012). These companies use software to automate clicking
the ‘‘Like’’ button for a certain page. Such software can
bypass Facebook’s security system. If popularity is devised
by only the number of likes and used as an input for users
in a certain region, it can also cause bias in personalization.
Interpersonal networks
According to Chen and Hernon (1982), the general population tends to obtain information through interpersonal
networks, rather than formal means. Durrance (1984) found
that more than 64 % of her research participants used
interpersonal sources. Sturges maintains that there is a
‘‘fundamental preference for information mediated by
human interaction’’ and that ‘‘there is evidence of this from
all parts of the world and from most important aspects of
human life’’ (Sturges 2001). Katz and Lazarsfeld (2005)
argue that we live in communities and we are inherently
tied to different social connections. We interact in formal
or informal social groupings, in so-called ‘‘primary
groups’’ such as families, friends, work teams, clubs or
organizations. These primary groups delineate major life

219

boundaries for each one of us in society, our routine
activities mainly occur in these primary groups.
Since our lives are mainly contained in primary groups,
our attitudes and opinions tend to derive from them as well
as our sources of information. Primary groups provide us
with ‘‘social reality’’ to validate our actions. As we
encounter unknown situations and difficult decisions, we
turn to and consult our social contacts, including both
strong (e.g., family and friends) and weak ties (e.g., colleagues, acquaintances) to help us form opinions and find
solutions (Granovetter 1981). Lu (2007) argues that,
through interactions concerning a particular issue, a primary group tends to develop a common view and collective
approach, hence, provides a social reality that helps and
validates decision making by its members. Because members of a primary group share the community language and
background information, their communication is made
effortless. Information so transmitted becomes easily
accessible and digestible (Lu 2007).
Because of these reasons, instead of relying on user’s
explicit preferences, or using an anonymous popularity
metric, personalization services started to use interpersonal
relationships to filter information. For instance Facebook
launched a program called ‘‘instant personalization’’ with an
exclusive set of partners, including the restaurant aggregator
site Yelp, Microsoft online document management site
docs.com, customizable Internet radio sites Pandora and
Spotify. These partners have been given access to public
information on Facebook (e.g., names, friend lists, and
interests and other information users have shared on their
Facebook profiles) to personalize a user’s experience on the
partner’s site. As an example, online music service Spotify
requires a Facebook account, and using the friends list in
Facebook, it shows the user what her friends have listened to.
The idea here is, since these contacts are part of our primary
group, we can trust their judgment on which information is
newsworthy. If our primary groups are available in every
web service we use, then our experience using that web
service can be customized.
Similarly Google introduced social search in 2009,
personalizing search results based on people you know in
Facebook and Twitter, rather than your personal behavior.
As a latest move, in 2012, Google introduced a feature
called ‘‘Search plus your world’’. This feature personalizes
the results using user connections in Google Plus, Google’s
social networking platform. This means you might see a
picture of a friend’s car when you search for a new automobile, or a restaurant recommended by a friend when you
search for a place to eat. Even if you aren’t a Google?user,
Google search results will show content posted publicly on
the social network that it judges to be relevant—profile
pages and pages dedicated to particular topics (Knight
2012).

123

220

E. Bozdag

Advertisers

Discussion

Traditional mass media is primarily supported by commercial sponsorship. This can cause the newspapers to
delete, change or prioritize news items due to advertising
pressure (Soley 2002). Same pressure applies to online
services; the majority of online service revenues come
from advertising (O’Dell 2011; Schroeder 2011; US
Securities and Exchange Commission 2009). Personalization is a very attractive tool for advertisers, as user data
collected for information filtering can be used for behavioral targeting. This sort of online targeting provides more
relevant online advertising to potential upcoming purchases. Using the built up user profile in online services,
advertising networks can closely match advertising to
potential customers. According to Guha et al. (2010),
Facebook uses various profile elements to display targeted
advertisement including age, gender, marital status, and
education. A Facebook advertiser can target users who live
within 50 miles of San Francisco, are male, between 24 and
30 years old, single, interested in women, like skiing, have
graduated from Harvard and work at Apple (Korolova
2010). Google allows advertisers to target ads based not
just on keywords and demographics, but on user interests
as well (Opsahl 2009). Companies have recognized that
providing advertisements along with their recommendations (suitably distinguished from the recommendation
results) can be extremely profitable. For instance, the
auction site Ebay provides a ‘‘deal of the day’’ for all
visitors to the site, in addition to ‘‘buy it now’’, special
items directly sold from a provider for a fixed price—both
of these are essentially advertisements (Garcia-Molina
et al. 2011).

Implications for an ethical analysis

Presentation algorithm
Once information is chosen through the information
selection algorithm and personalized for the user, it does
not mean that it will be seen and consumed. The placement
of the information might determine if it makes it out of the
filter. Joachims and Radlinski (2007) show that the way a
search engine presents results to the user has a strong
influence on how users act. In their study, for all results
below the third rank, users did not even look at the result
for more than half of the queries. Bar-Ilan et al. (2009)
report similar findings. Yue et al. (2010) report that the
attractiveness of information can also cause presentation
bias if the title and abstract of a resource is bolded, it
generates more clicks. They also show that people tend to
click on the top and bottom results. These findings show
that what the user will consume can be affected by the
algorithm, even after source selection and personalization.

123

Personalization is the latest step in this algorithmic filtering
process. As we have argued, even though personalization
algorithms have existed since the 1990s, information providing services such as search engines did not contain such
algorithms until recently. This is mainly due to the recent
availability of cheap and powerful backend infrastructure
and the increasing popularity of social networking sites.
Today information seeking services can use interpersonal
contacts of users in order to tailor information and to
increase relevancy. This not only introduces bias as our
model shows, but it also has serious implications for other
human values, including user autonomy, transparency,
objectivity, serendipity, privacy and trust. These values
introduce ethical questions. Do private companies that are
offering information services have a social responsibility,
and should they be regulated? Should they aim to promote
values that the traditional media was adhering to, such as
transparency, accountability and answerability? How can a
value such as transparency be promoted in an algorithm?
How should we balance between autonomy and serendipity
and between explicit and implicit personalization? How
should we define serendipity? Should relevancy be defined
as what is popular in a given location or by what our primary groups find interesting? Can algorithms truly replace
human filterers?
A relevant value to bias is information diversity. For
instance if a search engine is exercising bias toward an
advertiser, it will be limiting the diversity and democracy
inherent to the information (Granka 2010). Information
diversity is a rich and complex value that can be conceptualized in many different ways, and its interpretation
differs significantly per discipline. In media studies, it
might be translated as ‘‘minority voices having equal
access in the media’’ or ‘‘the degree which the media
relates to the society in such a way to reflect the distribution of opinion as it appears in the population’’ (Van
Cuilenburg 1999). In Computer Science literature, it can be
defined as ‘‘variety in the products offered by the system’’,
‘‘helping user find items he cannot easily find himself’’
(Zhang and Hurley 2008) or ‘‘identifying a list of items that
are dissimilar with each other, but nonetheless relevant to
the user’s interests’’ (Yu et al. 2009). While media studies
are analysing this ethical value in detail, almost all scholars
of search engine diversity seem to be limiting their
understanding of ‘‘bias’’ and ‘‘diversity’’ to popularity bias
(Granka 2010). As our model shows, popularity is only one
of the many factors that cause bias. We need a normative
conceptualization of the value information diversity that
borrows notions from media studies, such as media

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

ownership, content diversity, viewpoint diversity, reflection and open-access (Cuilenburg 1999). Only then can we
translate this complex value into design requirements of
information intermediaries and move towards a solution.
We believe that normative arguments based on our
model will be stronger, more concrete and constructive. As
an example, take the value user autonomy. Autonomy is
centrally concerned with self-determination, making one’s
own decisions, even if those decisions are sometimes
wrong (Friedman and Nissenbaum 1997). Autonomy is
thus the individual’s ability to govern herself, be one’s own
person, to be directed by considerations, desires, conditions, and characteristics that are not simply imposed
externally upon one, but are part of what can somehow be
considered one’s authentic self (Christman 2011). It is this
aspect of decision-making that allows us to be responsible
for the consequences of our actions. While designing
technology, one can thus assume that designers should
maximize user autonomy by following the simple dictum
that more control leads to more user autonomy. After all, if
autonomous individuals need to have freedom to choose
ends and means, then it could be said that wherever possible and at all levels, designers should provide users the
greatest possible control over computing power. Considering this notion of autonomy, one could argue that personalization algorithms should always be fully customized
and should be based on explicit personalization. However,
as the model shows, explicit personalization based on user
preferences is also prone to bias. People might be interested in things that they did not know they were interested
in, due to the formulation of the topic. Further, users might
not accurately assess their interests in certain information
items. As we have mentioned, user’s declared and actual
interests may differ.
This seems to suggest that autonomy in this context
should not be understood as ‘‘full user control’’. User
autonomy seems to have less to do with simply the degree
of control and more to do with what aspects of the algorithm are controllable, and the user’s conception and
knowledge of the algorithm. As Friedman and Nissenbaum
(1997) notes, achieving higher order desires and goals will
enhance autonomy, whereas excessive control may actually
interfere with user autonomy by obstructing a user’s ability
to achieve desired goals. This means that, implicit personalization must be combined with explicit personalization to decrease excessive control. For instance a
personalized search engine might be implemented in such a
way that, the system enters a dialogue with the user,
explicitly stating that a certain query is personalized,
explaining why and due to which reasons it is personalized.
The system can thus make assumptions to predict what the
user might like, but it should refine itself by asking simple
questions to the user to confirm if those assumptions were

221

correct. While the user might not control the full algorithm,
the system might receive feedbacks and show the
user under which conditions it is making certain
recommendations.
As we have argued, information should be accepted as a
primary good, a vital good for people to plan their lives
rationally and to participate adequately in the common life
of their societies (Hoven and Rooksby 2008). Thus, having
access to information affects the value of liberty perceived
by an individual. We therefore argue that personalizing
algorithms affect the moral value of information as they
facilitate an individual’s access to information. Contrary to
earlier stages of the Internet-era, when the problem of
information access boiled down to having access to hardware, today the problem of access to information concerns
the ability to intentionally find the right information, or the
likeliness of unintentionally stumbling upon the relevant
information.
Some argue that users should sabotage the personalization system by deliberately clicking on links that make it
hard for the personalization engines, erasing cookies,
unlocking everyone on a social network, posting something
and then ask the Facebook friends to click the ‘‘Like’’
button and comment, or simply switch to a service that
does not use personalization (Pariser 2011a; Elgan 2011).
However, these tactics are tedious, not always possible to
perform and their effect depends on the implementation of
the current system. Further, personalization might actually
have a positive effect on the ecology of the cyberspace: the
incentives to game the system and invest in practices like
‘‘search engine optimization’’ can become weaker (Morozov 2011; Goldman 2005). We should come with design
suggestions to minimize the bad effects and improve the
good effects of this technology instead of trying to get rid
of it all together.
The question is then not whether to have personalization
or not, but how to design morally good personalization
technology. ‘Having too much information with no real
way of separating the wheat from the chaff’ is what Benkler (2006) calls the Babel objection: individuals must have
access to some mechanism that sifts through the universe
of information, knowledge, and cultural moves in order to
whittle them down into manageable and usable scope’. The
question then arises whether the service providers currently
active on the Internet are able to fulfill the ‘human need for
filtration’. Although the fulfillment does not hinge on
proprietary services alone as there are cooperative peerproduction alternatives that operate as filters as well, the
filtering market is dominated by commercial services such
as Google and Facebook (Hitwise 2010). Having an option
to turn it on or off is not really a choice for the users, as
they will be too dependent on it in the existence of information overload.

123

222

Implications for design
In order to anticipate different contexts of use in personalization, a value based study such as Value Sensitive
Design (Flanagan et al. 2008; Friedman et al. 2006) seems
to be the right direction. Value sensitive design consists of
an empirical investigation accompanied by a philosophical
analysis and a technical study. Friedman and Nissenbaum
(1996) argue that designers should not only envision a
system’s intended situation of use, but to account for
increasingly diverse social contexts of use. Designers
should then reasonably anticipate probable contexts of use
and design for these. If it is not possible to design for
extended contexts of use, designers should attempt to
articulate constraints on the appropriate contexts of a system’s use. Bias can manifest itself when the system is used
by a population with different values than those assumed in
the design. This is especially true for the design of most
online information intermediaries, where users from the
whole world will be served instead of only local ones.
Another issue that is relevant to the design of personalization algorithms and other filtering mechanisms is
exposure diversity. Even if an information intermediary
provides a balanced information diet, this does not guarantee that the user will actually consume this information
(Napoli 1999; Helberger 2011; Munson and Resnick 2010).
Content diversity is not equal to exposure diversity. We
need to devise methods to increase the consumption of
challenging content by users. Munson and Resnick (2010)
distinguished two types of users: challenge averse (those
who ignore diverse content) and diversity seeking. They
tried to show more diverse content to those who were
challenge averse, for instance by highlighting agreeable
items or showing agreeable items first. However, this did
not increase users’ consumption habits, they still ignored
challenging items. This requires us to research further how
challenging items can be made attractive to users so that
they actually consume the incoming information.
Implications for the design of social filtering
Media scholars often argue our interpersonal contacts have
become our gatekeepers (Shoemaker and Vos 2009).
However, if this approach becomes ubiquitous in design, it
can lead to problems. First, this obviously raises concerns
for privacy. An item a user has consumed can be shared
with others without their notice. The Electronic Privacy
Information Center, American Civil Liberties Union and
American Library Association claim the changes have
made sharing information on Facebook a passive rather
than active activity. In this way, users might reveal more
than they intend (Nagesh 2011). Even if sharing process
was more active, it can still cause issues. For instance, an

123

E. Bozdag

item a user has shared in a social network in certain context
and has forgotten can reappear in a Google search result in
a different context. Further, an implicit user profile built for
personalization leads to epistemological problems. Does
the knowledge about the user (gathered by user’s interaction with the system) represent the reality? Does the user
interact with its primary group the same way he interacts in
the offline world? How much does a user have a say in this
built profile and to what degree can he control the dissemination of this representation of himself?
Second, not everyone in our online social networks will be
part of our primary group; not every online ‘‘friend’’ is our
real friend and we might share different things with our
online friends. We sometimes add people to our network
because of courtesy, as it otherwise might cause relationship
problems in the offline world (‘‘Why did you not answer my
friend request?’’). To remedy this, we can arrange the level of
our relationship with others in a social network; we can
divide them into lists or groups. We can then choose what we
want to share with which group. However, our contact list in
a social network can be connected with a different service,
for personalization. When we use our social network in
another service, lists we have created can suddenly disappear. For instance, Spotify uses Facebook contact list to
provide recommendations per individual user. However, it
ignores all the lists that have been created and shows what all
friends have listened to regardless of the relationship
between the user and the friend. The categorization the user
has set in the Facebook platform in order to define and
control his relationships are gone when the Facebook data is
used elsewhere. Next to increasing information overload,
this can also cause privacy issues. Even if I choose to share
things with some people in Facebook context, everything I
listen to in Spotify will be shown to all my Facebook users.
This context loss will be more common as more services
integrate with each other.
Third, not everyone has competence on every subject.
Scholars in various disciplines have found that there are
strategic points for the transmission of information in every
group (Agada 1999; Chatman 1987; Lu 2007). Even though
it is possible that people can interact randomly with anyone
who has available information, information transmission is
never a simple aggregation (Slater 1955; Katz and Lazarsfeld
2005). Some individuals, who are more information-savvy,
will automatically occupy strategic positions to facilitate
access to information to others. Depending on the subject
matter, not everyone in a group is equally important or
qualified in providing information. Those who have more
knowledge will act as gatekeepers. I might trust John’s
competence in football, and use him as my gatekeeper in this
subject, but not in the area of international politics. However,
in most online services, we get to see everything published
by a user, or nothing at all. We need mechanisms to assess the

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization

competency of the information sharer and determine the
needed gatekeeper for a given context.
Fourth, online services are trying to capture user’s intent
by using social gestures. Examples of these social gestures
include the ‘‘like’’ and ‘‘subscribe’’ buttons in Facebook
and the ‘‘?1’’ button in Google search. By clicking on
these buttons users express their interest and communicate
to their peers. However, this sort of expression seems
somehow limiting (Pariser 2011b). The reason of the
expression and the emotion behind the expression is not
captured by the button. There is a difference between liking
a film, liking a director, liking a genre or liking films of a
certain period. I might like a film for various reasons: to
recommend to friends, to express my identity, to receive
further film recommendations or to add it into my collection for later use. Such buttons are simplifying complex
human actions and emotions into a single dimension. As
Friedman and Nissenbaum (1996) have argued, attempting
to formalize human constructs such as discourse, judgments, or intuitions and trying to quantify the qualitative,
discretizing the continuous will lead to biases.
Fifth, online services assume that users want to have an
online experience where consuming any sort of information
is done socially and collaboratively. This is why Google is
making social search the default type of search and Facebook
persuades users to share more information or leave a trace of
a completed activity, by its ‘‘frictionless sharing’’. These
approaches aim to make sharing an effortless activity, in
which everything is shared and hopefully some things will be
found interesting by the users. However by promoting ease,
they are undermining not only privacy, but also autonomy. In
a frictionless sharing environment, user now cannot actively
reflect on things he consumes and choose on what to share.
Finally, if we know the information we consume is
being shared and read by our primary groups, we might
change our behavior on what to share, and even choose
what to consume if this is shared automatically. According
to Sunstein (2008), group members may fail to disclose
what they know out of respect for the information publicly
announced by others. That is, even if we have big doubts
about claims made by the majority of a group, we might
think they are not errors at all; not so many people can be
wrong. Individuals can also silence themselves to avoid the
disapproval of peers and supervisors. As a result of these
two forces, information cascades might occur; individual
errors might amplify instead of being corrected, leading to
widespread mistakes. Information held by all or most will
be prioritized over held by a few or one.
Implications for social network analysis
While bias might manifest itself in the social platform,
users themselves might be biased in information sharing.

223

Therefore we need to determine whether bias occurs naturally in social networks, as personalization algorithms use
more and more social data. Do users tend to follow likeminded users? Do they do this intentionally? Do they only
share things that they agree with? Do they receive diverse
information directly or indirectly? Do they only want to
follow popular items coming from major news sources as
the current services, or does the minority receive a chance
to contribute to the debate? Is the sharing behaviour of the
user changing with what he is receiving? Does culture
have an affect in diverse information seeking behaviour?
To answer such questions, we need to perform more
empirical studies.
Facebook performed one of the few studies that actually
studies bias in social networks (Bakshy 2012). The
empirical study suggests that online social networks may
actually increase the spread of novel information and
diverse viewpoints. According to Bakshy (2012), even
though people are more likely to consume and share
information that comes from close contacts that they
interact with frequently (like discussing a photo from last
night’s party), the vast majority of information comes from
contacts that they interact with infrequently. These socalled ‘‘weak-ties’’ (Granovetter 1981) are also more likely
to share novel information.
Even though this is one of the first empirical studies that
aims to measure information diffusion, there are some
concerns with it: First of all, the study is not repeatable and
the results are not reproducible. Facebook scientists simply
manipulated newsfeed of 253 million users, which only
Facebook can perform. Second, our weak ties give us
access to new stories that we wouldn’t otherwise have seen,
but these stories might not be different ideologically from
our own general worldview. They might be new information, but not particularly diverse. The research does not
indicate whether we encounter and engage with news that
opposes our own beliefs through links sent by ‘‘weak
links’’. It could very well be that we comment on and reshare links to cat videos sent by our previous neighbour, or
read a cooking recipe posted by our vegetarian friend,
ignore anything political or challenging/contradictory to
our world view. The study measures the amount of different information one gets, not different world-views.
Third, the users might refrain from novel information if
they consider it to be offensive or distasteful to their
(strong or weak) ties. Fourth, even if users are shown novel
information, this does not mean they will be exposed to it.
They might simply choose to ignore challenging items.
Fifth, the information intermediary might filter out the
novel content provided by our weak ties. If, for instance,
Facebook decides which updates you see on your wall
based on the frequency of an interaction, weak ties might
as well disappear, as the user will not interact very often

123

224

with a weak tie. At the moment the only way to prevent this
is to manually click on each and every user and choose
‘‘show me all updates from this user’’. Otherwise Facebook
will make a decision on what is important based on some
unknown criteria.

E. Bozdag
Acknowledgments The author would like to thank Martijn Warnier
and Ibo van de Poel for their valuable comments. This research is
supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO) Mozaiek grant, file number 017.007.111.

References
Conclusion
Gatekeeping theory acknowledges the increasing popularity of social networking, online information seeking and
information sharing services. It is often claimed that since
users can select and share information online, they can be
gatekeepers for each other. This then diminishes the power
of media professionals. However, in this paper we have
shown that even though the traditional gatekeepers might
become less important, users are not becoming the sole
gatekeepers. The gates are certainly not disappearing.
Platforms on which users operate have an influence; they
are one of the new gatekeepers. Online gatekeeping services are not just algorithms running on machines; they are
a mix of human editors and machine code designed by
humans. People affect the design of the algorithms, but
they also can also manually influence the filtering process
after the algorithm has been designed. Therefore, switching
from human editing to algorithmic gatekeeping does not
remove all human biases. Technical biases such as third
party manipulation or popularity will exist due to the
computerized form of gatekeeping. Also, individual factors
such as personal judgments, organizational factors such as
company policies, external factors such as government or
advertiser requests will still be present due to the role of
humans in providing these services.
In this paper, we introduced a model of algorithmic
gatekeeping based on traditional gatekeeping model and
focused on particular filtering processes including personalization. We show that factors that caused bias in mass
media news selection still play a role in information
selection in online web services. We have shown that
search results in Google can differ, but an extensive
empirical research is needed to determine the extent of socalled ‘‘echo chambers’’ in social networks. What percentage of information do users miss or feel like they are
missing if they turn on a personal filter or an inter-personal
filter? Is there enough variety in their choice of friends?
Are users aware of these algorithms? Do they modify their
filter periodically or switch to other forms of information
sources? Are there routines that are used in the design of
personalization algorithms, just like routines used in traditional gatekeeping? How does the introduction of
implicit and explicit filtering algorithms affect user trust in
systems and user autonomy? More research is needed in
order to answer these questions.

123

Accuracast. (2010). Facebook advertising policies homophobic. May.
http://searchdailynews.blogspot.com/2010/05/facebook-advert
ising-policies.html.
Adomavicius, G., Sankaranarayanan, R., Sen, S., & Tuzhilin, A.
(2005). Incorporating contextual information in recommender
systems using a multidimensional approach. ACM Transactions
on Information Systems (TOIS), 23(1), 103–145.
Agada, J. (1999). Inner-city gatekeepers: An exploratory survey of
their information use environment. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 50(1), 74–85. http://www.eric.
ed.gov/ERICWebPortal/detail?accno=EJ582286.
Albanesius, C. (2011). Schmidt, yelp clash over google’s search
tactics. PCMAG. http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2393
369,00.asp.
Althaus, S. L., & Tewksbury, D. (2002). Agenda setting and the ‘new’
news. Communication Research, 29(2), 180.
Badash, D. (2011). Has facebook censorship gone too far? The New
Civil Rights Movement. http://thenewcivilrightsmovement.com/
has-facebook-censorship-gone-too-far/politics/2011/11/07/29714.
Bagdikian, B. H. (2004). The New media monopoly: A completely
revised and updated edition with seven new chapters. Beacon
Press, May. http://www.amazon.com/dp/0807061875.
Bakshy, E., Rosenn, I., Marlow, C., & Adamic, L. (2012). The role of
social networks in information diffusion. In Proceedings of the 21st
international conference on World Wide Web (WWW ’12) (pp.
519–528). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/2187836.
2187907. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2187836.2187907.
Bar-Ilan, J., Keenoy, K., Levene, M., & Yaari, E. (2009). Presentation
bias is significant in determining user preference for search
results—A user study. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 60(1), 135–149.
Barzilai-Nahon, K. (2008). Toward a theory of network gatekeeping:
A framework for exploring information control. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology,
59(9), 1493–1512.
Barzilai-Nahon, K. (2009). Gatekeeping: A critical review. Annual
Review of Information Science and Technology, 43(1), 1–79.
Benkler, Y. (2006). The wealth of networks: How social production
transforms markets and freedom. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Bruns, A. (2008). Gatewatching, gatecrashing: Futures for tactical
news media. In M. Boler (Ed.), Digital media and democracy:
Tactics in hard times (pp. 247–271). MIT Press. http://www.
amazon.com/dp/0262026422.
Bruns, A. (2011). Gatekeeping, gatewatching, real-time feedback.
Brazilian Journalism Research, 7, 117–136
Chatman, E. A. (1987). Opinion leadership, poverty, and information
sharing. RQ, 26(3), 53–341. http://www.eric.ed.gov/ERICWeb
Portal/detail?accno=EJ354348.
Chen, C. C., & Hernon, P. (1982). Information seeking: Assessing and
anticipating user needs. Neal-Schuman Publishers. http://
books.google.nl/books?id=_6fgAAAAMAAJ.
Chibnall S. (1975}. The crime reporter: A study in the production of
commercial knowledge. Sociology, 9(1), 49–66.
Chilling effects. (2005). Scientology complains that advanced technology appears in Google groups. http://www.chillingeffects.
org/dmca512/notice.cgi?NoticeID=2355.

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization
Christman, J. (2011). Autonomy in moral and political philosophy. In
E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
Stanford, CA: CSLI, Stanford University.
Cisco. (2011). Cisco visual networking index: Forecast and methodology, whitepaper. http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/colla
teral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-481360_
ns827_Networking_Solutions_White_Paper.html.
Costolo, D. (2011). The trends are algorithmic, not chosen by us but
we edit out any w/obscenities. July. https://twitter.com/#!/dickc/
status/97686216681594880.
Cuilenburg, V. (1999). On competition, access and diversity in media,
old and new some remarks for communications policy in the
information age. New Media & Society, 1(2), 183–207.
Dekker, V. (2006). Google: Een zwijgzame rechter en politieagent.
Trouw.
Diaz, A. (2008). Through the Google goggles: Sociopolitical bias in
search engine design. In S. Amanda., & Z. Michael (Eds.),
Information science and knowledge management (Vol. 14,
pp. 11–34). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Durrance, J. C. (1984). Armed for action library response to citizen
information needs. New York, NY: Neal Schuman.
Edelman, B. (2011). Bias in search results: Diagnosis and response.
Indian Journal of Law and Technology, 7, 16.
Efrati, A. (2010). Rivals say Google plays favourites. Wall Street
Journal, December. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240
52748704058704576015630188568972.html.
Elgan, M. (2011). How to pop your Internet ‘filter bubble’.
Computerworld. http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9216
484/Elgan_How_to_pop_your_Internet_filter_bubble_.
Eppler, M. J., & Mengis, J. (2004). The concept of information
overload: A review of literature from organization science,
accounting, marketing, mis, and related disciplines. The Information Society, 20(5), 325–344.
Fallows, D. (2005). Search engine users. http://www.pewinternet.org/
Reports/2005/Search-Engine-Users/8-Conclusions/
Conclusions.aspx.
Fishman, M. (1988). Manufacturing the news. Austin: University of
Texas Press.
Flanagan, M., Howe, D., & Nissenbaum, H. (2008) Embodying
values in technology: Theory and practice. In J. van den Hoven
& J. Weckert (Eds.), Information technology and moral philosophy (pp. 322–353). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fong, J. (2011). Facebook’s bias against 3rd party apps. http://
www.jenfongspeaks.com/facebooks-bias-against-3rd-party-apps/.
Foundem. 2009. Foundem’s Google story.
Friedman, B., Kahn, P. H., & Alan, B. (2006). Value sensitive design
and information systems. Human-Computer Interaction in
Management Information Systems: Foundations, 4, 348–372.
Friedman, B., & Nissenbaum, H. (1996). Bias in computer systems.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 14(3), 330–347.
Friedman, B., & Nissenbaum, H. (1997). Software agents and user
autonomy. In Proceedings of the first international conference
on autonomous agents—AGENTS’97, pp. 466–469.
Gans, H. J. (2005). Deciding what’s news: A study of CBS evening
news, NBC nightly news, newsweek, and time (2nd ed.).
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Garcia-Molina, H., Koutrika, G., & Parameswaran, A. (2011).
Information seeking. Communications of the ACM, 54(11),
121. doi:10.1145/2018396.2018423.
Gauch, S., Speretta, M., Chandramouli, A., & Micarelli, A. (2007).
User profiles for personalized information access. The adaptive
web (pp. 54–89). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Gillespie, T. (2012). Can an algorithm be wrong? Limn (2). http://
limn.it/can-an-algorithm-be-wrong/.
Goldman, E. (2005). Search engine bias and the demise of search
engine utopianism. Yale JL & Technology, 8, 188.

225
Goldman, E. (2011). Revisiting search engine bias chapter in
(Contemporary Issues in Cyberlaw), William Mitchell Law
Review, 38, 96–110.
Google. (2008). We knew the web was big. http://
googleblog.blogspot.com/2008/07/we-knew-web-was-big.html.
Google. (2011). Transparency report. http://www.google.com/
transparencyreport/governmentrequests/.
Google. (2012). Search plus your world: Personal results. http://
support.google.com/websearch/bin/
answer.py?hl=en&answer=1710607.
Granka, L. A. (2010). The politics of search: A decade retrospective.
The Information Society, 26(5), 364–374. doi:10.1080/
01972243.2010.511560.
Granovetter, M. S. (1981). The strength of weak ties: a network theory
revisited. State University of New York, Department of
Sociology.
Groot, J. (2004). Trouw wekenlang niet te vinden op Google. Webwereld.
Guha, S., Cheng, B., & Francis, P. (2010). Challenges in measuring
online advertising systems. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement (IMC ’10) (pp.
81–87). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/1879141.
1879152. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1879141.1879152.
Helberger, N. (2011). Diversity by design. Journal of Information
Policy, 1, 441–469.
Hermida, A. (2012). Tweets and truth: Journalism as a discipline of
collaborative verification. Journalism Practice, 6(5-6), 659–668.
Hilbert, M. (2012). Toward a synthesis of cognitive biases: How
noisy information processing can bias human decision making.
Psychological Bulletin, 138(2), 211–237.
Hitwise. (2010). Social networks now more popular than search
engines in the UK.
Hoven, J. V., & Rooksby, E. (2008). Distributive justice and the value
of information: A (broadly) Rawlsian approach. England:
Cambridge University Press.
IBM. (2011). Bringing smarter computing to big data.
Ingram, M. (2011). The downside of facebook as a public space:
Censorship. June. http://gigaom.com/2011/06/21/the-downsideof-facebook-as-a-public-space-censorship/.
Jacobs, G. (2010). Techradar: How to optimise your site for Google
Caffeine. Techradar.com, April. http://www.techradar.com/
news/internet/how-to-optimise-your-site-for-google-caffeine685436.
Joachims, T., & Radlinski, F. (2007). Search engines that learn from
implicit feedback. Computer, 40(8), 34–40.
Katz, E. (1996). And deliver us from segmentation. Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 546, 22–33.
Katz, E., & Lazarsfeld, P. (2005). Personal influence: The part played
by people in the flow of mass communications. New Jersey:
Transaction Publishers.
Kincaid, J. (2010). Techcrunch/today’s lesson: Make facebook angry,
and they’ll censor you into oblivion. TechCrunch. http://
techcrunch.com/2010/11/22/facebook-censorship/.
Klein, J. (2011). A web marketer’s guide to reddit. December. http://
www.distilled.net/blog/social-media/a-web-marketers-guide-toreddit/.
Knight, W. (2012). Google hopes to make friends with a more social
search: technology review. Technology Review. http://www.
technologyreview.com/computing/39444/.
Korolova, A. (2010). Privacy violations using microtargeted ads: A case
study. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
data mining workshops (ICDMW ’10) (pp. 474–482). Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society. doi:10.1109/ICDMW.
2010.137. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICDMW.2010.137.
Lasorsa, D. L., Lewis, S. C., & Holton, A. (2012). Normalizing
Twitter-Journalism practice in an emerging communication
space. Journalism Studies, 13(1), 19–36.

123

226
Lavie, T., Sela, M., Oppenheim, I., Inbar, O., & Meyer, J. (2009).
User attitudes towards news content personalization. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 68(8), 483–495.
Levinson, P. (1999). Digital McLuhan: A guide to the information
millennium (1st ed.). London: Routledge.
Lotan, G. (2011). Data reveals that ‘‘occupying’’ twitter trending
topics is harder than it looks! http://blog.socialflow.com/post/
7120244374/data-reveals-that-occupying-twitter-trending-topicsis-harder-than-it-looks.
Lu, Y. (2007). The human in human information acquisition:
Understanding gatekeeping and proposing new directions in
scholarship. Library & Information Science Research, 29(1),
103–123.
Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Buighin, J., Dobbs, R., & Roxburgh, C.
(2011). Big data: The next frontier for innovation, competition, and
productivity. McKinsey Global Institute report. Whitereport.
Downloadable
at http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_
technology/big_data_the_next_frontier_for_innovation.
Metz, C. (2011a). Google opens curtain on ‘manual’ search penalties.
The register. http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/02/18/google_
on_manual_search_penalties/.
Metz, C. (2011b). Google contradicts own counsel in face of antitrust
probe, admits existence of search algorithm whitelists. http://
www.theregister.co.uk/2011/03/11/google_admits_search_algo
rithm_whitelists/.
Morozov, E. (2011). Your own facts. Book review of ‘the filter bubble,
what the internet is hiding from you’. The New York Times.
Mowshowitz, A., & Kawaguchi, A. (2002). Bias on the web.
Communications of the ACM, 45(9), 56–60.
Munson, S. Z., & Resnick, P. (2010). Presenting diverse political
opinions: How and how much CHI’10. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems.
Nagesh, G. (2011). Privacy advocates want facebook probed on
recent changes.
Napoli, P. (1999). Deconstructing the diversity principle. Journal of
Communication, 49(4), 7–34.
Nissenbaum, H., & Introna, L. D. (2000). Shaping the web: Why the
politics of search engines matters. The Information Society,
16(3), 169–185.
O’Dell, J. (2011). Facebook’s ad revenue hit $1.86B for 2010.
Mashable.
Opsahl, K. (2009). Google begins behavioural targeting ad program.
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2009/03/google-begins-behavioraltargeting-ad-program.
Pariser, E. (2011a). 10 ways to pop your filter bubble. http://
www.thefilterbubble.com/10-things-you-can-do.
Pariser, E. (2011b). The filter bubble: What the internet is hiding from
you. London: Penguin Press.
Priestley, M. (1999). Honest news in the slashdot decade. First
Monday, 4, 2–8.
Resnick, P., Lacovou, N., Suchak, M., Bergstrom, P., & Riedl, J.
(1994). GroupLens: an open architecture for collaborative
filtering of netnews. In Proceedings of the 1994 ACM conference
on computer supported cooperative work (CSCW ’94) (pp.
175–186). New York, NY, USA: ACM. doi:10.1145/192844.
192905. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/192844.192905.
Salihefendic, A. (2010). How reddit ranking algorithms work. http://
amix.dk/blog/post/19588.
Schroeder, S. (2011). Twitter ad revenue may reach $150 million this
year. Mashable.
Searchenginewatch. (2012). Twitter: Google search plus your world
bad for web users. Search Engine Watch. http://searcheng
inewatch.com/article/2136873/Twitter-Google-Search-Plus-YourWorld-Bad-for-Web-Users.
Segal, D. (2011). Search optimization and its dirty little secrets. The
New York Times.

123

E. Bozdag
Shardanand, U., & Maes, P. (1995). Social information filtering:
algorithms for automating ‘‘word of mouth’’. In I. R. Katz, R.
Mack, L. Marks, M. B Rosson & J. Nielsen (Eds.), Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing
systems (CHI ’95) (pp. 210–217). New York, NY, USA: ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. doi:10.1145/223904.
223931. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/223904.223931.
Shoemaker, P. J, Vos, T., & Reese, P. (2008). Journalists as gatekeepers.
In K. W. Jorgensen., & T. Hanitzsch (Eds.). The handbook of
journalism studies (pp. 73–87). New York: Routledge
Shoemaker, P. J., & Vos, T. (2009). Gatekeeping theory (1st ed.).
London: Routledge.
Slater, P. E. (1955). Role differentiation in small groups. American
Sociological Review, 20(3), 300–310.
Smith, J., McCarthy, J. D., McPhail, C., & Augustyn, B. (2001). From
protest to agenda building: Description bias in media coverage of
protest events in Washington, D.C. Social Forces, 79(4), 1397–1423.
Smyth, B. (2007). A community-based approach to personalizing web
search. Computer, 40(8), 42–50. doi:10.1109/MC.2007.259.
Soley, L. C. (2002). Censorship Inc: The corporate threat to free
speech in the United States. USA: Monthly Review Press.
Sturges, P. (2001). Gatekeepers and other intermediaries. Aslib
Proceedings, 53(2), 62–67.
Sullivan, D. (2012). Google’s results get more personal with ‘search
plus your world’. Search engine land. http://goo.gl/xYoRV.
Sunstein, C. R. (2002). Republic.com. USA: Princeton University
Press.
Sunstein, C. (2006). Preferences, paternalism, and liberty. Royal
Institute of Philosophy Supplements, 59, 233–264.
Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Infotopia: How many minds produce
knowledge. USA: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, D. (2011). Everything you need to know about facebook’s
edgerank. The Next Web. http://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/
2011/05/09/everything-you-need-to-know-about-facebooksedgerank/.
Techcrunch. (2011). Edgerank: The secret sauce that makes facebook’s news feed tick.
Tewksbury, D. (2003). What do Americans really want to know?
Tracking the behavior of news readers on the internet. Journal of
Communication, 53(4), 694–710.
Twitter. (2010). To trend or not to trend. http://blog.twitter.com/2010/
12/to-trend-or-not-to-trend.html.
Tynan, D. (2012). How companies buy facebook friends, likes, and
buzz. PCWorld.
Upbin, B. (2011). Facebook ushers in era of new social gestures—
Forbes. Forbes.
US Securities and Exchange Commission. (2009). Google Inc.,
Consolidated Balance Sheets. http://www.sec.gov/Archives/
edgar/data/1288776/000119312509150129/dex992.htm.
Van Couvering, E. (2007). Is relevance relevant? Market, science, and
war: discourses of search engine quality. Journal of ComputerMediated Communication, 12(3), 866.
Van der Hof, S., & Prins, C. (2008). Personalisation and its influence
on identities, behaviour and social values. Profiling the European citizen: Cross-disciplinary perspectives (pp. 111–127).
Netherlands: Springer.
Vaughan, L., & Thelwall, M. (2004). Search engine coverage bias:
Evidence and possible causes. Information Processing and
Management, 40(4), 693–707.
Witten, I. A. (2007). Bias, privacy, and personalization on the web. In
M. Sankara Reddy & H. Kumar (Eds.), E-libraries: Problems
and perspectives. New Delhi: Allied.
Wittman, C. (2011). Comments 4x more valuable than likes. http://
goo.gl/wnSES.
Wright, J. D. (2011) Defining and measuring search bias: Some
preliminary evidence. International center for law & economics,

Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization
November 2011; George Mason Law & Economics Research
Paper No. 12–14. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2004649.
Yu, C., Lakshmanan, L., & Amer-Yahia, S. (2009). It takes variety to
make a world: Diversification in recommender systems. In
Proceedings of the 12th international conference on extending
database technology: Advances in database technology (pp.
368–378). http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1516404.
Yue, Y., Patel, R., & Roehrig, H. (2010). Beyond position bias:
Examining result attractiveness as a source of presentation bias

227
in click through data. In Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on World wide web (pp. 1011–1018). http://
dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1772793.
Zhang, M., & Hurley, N. (2008). Avoiding monotony: Improving the
diversity of recommendation lists, 2008 ACM international
conference on recommender systems (ACM Recsys’08) (pp.
123–130). Switzerland: Lausanne.
Zimmer, M. (2011). Facebook’s censorship problem. June. http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/michael-zimmer/facebooks-censorshipprob_b_852001.html.

123

