the algorithmic rise of the “alt-right”
by jessie daniels

60

contexts.org

On a late summer evening in 2017, members of the far-right descended
on Charlottesville, Virginia with tiki-torches held up in defense of
confederate general Robert E. Lee’s statue in what was dubbed a
“Unite the Right” rally, which had been organized mostly online. The
next day, August 13, White nationalists rallied again and violently
clashed with counter protestors. One drove his car into a multiracial
crowd, killing one and seriously injuring 19 others. As it has turned
out, the events in Charlottesville were a watershed moment in the
algorithmic rise of White nationalism in the U.S.
White nationalism has gone “from being a conversation
you could hold in a bathroom, to the front parlor,” according
to William H. Regnery II. A multimillionaire, Regnery has spent a
significant sum of his inherited wealth pushing his “race realist”
agenda via a publishing house and the National Policy Institute,
a think-tank. When his protégé and grantee, Richard Spencer,
coined the new term “alt-right” in 2008, few took notice. Back
then, Jared Taylor, publisher of the White nationalist site American Renaissance, said he thought of his own efforts as “just
making a racket,” but now he sees himself as part of an ascendant social movement, with Spencer in a lead role. He, along
with Jason Kessler, helped organize the rally in Charlottesville.
“I think Tuesday was the most important day in the White
nationalist movement,” Derek Black told a New York Times
reporter. Black, a former White nationalist, was referring to the Tuesday following
the Charlottesville rally, when the current
occupant of the White House repeated
White nationalist talking points defending
the statues of America’s founding slaveholders. In that New York Times interview, Black
went on to describe his shock, “… Tuesday
just took my breath away. I was sitting in a
coffee shop and I thought the news from this was done when I
read that he had come back and he said there were good people
in the White nationalist rally and he salvaged their message.”
It’s certainly not the first time that a sitting president has openly
heralded White supremacy from the oval office, but it is the first
time that the ideology of White supremacy from both extreme
and mainstream sources has been spread through the algorithms
of search engines and social media platforms.
There are two strands of conventional wisdom unfolding
in popular accounts of the rise of the alt-right. One says that
what’s really happening can be attributed to a crisis in White

identity: the alt-right is simply a manifestation of the angry White
male who has status anxiety about his declining social power.
Others contend that the alt-right is an unfortunate eddy in the
vast ocean of Internet culture. Related to this is the idea that
polarization, exacerbated by filter bubbles, has facilitated the
spread of Internet memes and fake news promulgated by the
alt-right. While the first explanation tends to ignore the influence of the Internet, the second dismisses the importance of
White nationalism. I contend that we have to understand both
at the same time.
For the better part of 20 years, I have been working with
emerging technology and studying White supremacy in various
forms of media. In the 1990s, I examined hundreds of printed
newsletters from extremist groups and found that many of their

The rise of the alt-right is both a continuation
of a centuries-old dimension of racism in the
U.S. and part of an emerging media ecosystem
powered by algorithms.
talking points resonated with mainstream popular culture and
politicians, like Pat Buchanan and Bill Clinton. After that, I left
academia for a while and worked in the tech industry, where I
produced online coverage of events like the 2000 presidential
recount. When I returned to academic research, I did a followup study tracking how some of the groups I’d studied in print
had—or had not—made it on to the Internet. I spent time at
places like Stormfront, the White nationalist portal launched
in the mid-1990s, and found that some groups had gained a
much more nefarious presence than in their print-only days.
And, I interviewed young people about how they made sense

Contexts, Vol. 17, Issue 1, pp. 60-65. ISSN 1536-5042, electronic ISSN 1537-6052. © 2018 American
Sociological Association. http://contexts.sagepub.com. DOI 10.1177/1536504218766547.

WINTER 2018

contexts

61

of White supremacy they encountered online. About the time
I finished my second book in 2008, social media platforms and
their algorithms began to change the way White nationalists
used the Internet. Now I look at the current ascendance of the
alt-right from a dual vantage point, informed both my research
into White supremacy and my experience in the tech industry.
The rise of the alt-right is both a continuation of a centuriesold dimension of racism in the U.S. and part of an emerging
media ecosystem powered by algorithms. White supremacy
has been a feature of the political landscape in the U.S. since
the start; vigilante White supremacist movements have been
a constant since just after the confederacy lost its battle to

building race into the “race-less” internet
The rise of the alt-right would not be possible without the
infrastructure built by the tech industry, and yet, the industry likes
to imagine itself as creating a “race-less” Internet. In a 1997 ad
from a now-defunct telecom company, the Internet was touted
as a “place where we can communicate mind-to-mind, where
there is no race, no gender, no infirmities… only minds.” Then
narration poses the question, “Is this utopia?” as the word is typed
out. “No, the Internet.” In many ways, the ad reflected what was
then a rather obscure document, written by John Perry Barlow in
1996. Barlow, a recently deceased co-founder of the Electronic
Frontier Foundation, wrote A Declaration of the Independence of
Cyberspace, a manifesto-style manuscript
in which he conceives of the Internet as a
“place,” much like the imaginary American frontier in a Hollywood western, that
should remain free from control by “governments of the industrial world,” those
“weary giants of flesh and steel.” He ends
with a grand hope for building “a civilization of the Mind in Cyberspace. May it be
more humane and fair than the world your
governments have made before.”
While the giddy notion of a “mind-to-mind” utopia online
may seem quaint by the standards of today’s “don’t-read-thecomments” Internet, Barlow’s view remains, more than 20 years
later, foundational in Silicon Valley. And it informs thinking in
the tech industry when it comes to the alt-right. When several
tech companies kicked alt-right users off their platforms after
Charlottesville, they were met with a vigorous backlash from
many in the industry. Matthew Prince, CEO and co-founder of
Cloudflare, who reluctantly banned virulently racist site, The Daily
Stormer, from his service, he fretted about the decision. “As [an]
internet user, I think it’s pretty dangerous if my moral, political or
economic whims play some role in deciding who can and cannot
be online,” he said. The Electronic Frontier Foundation issued a
statement that read, in part, “we believe that no one—not the
government and not private commercial enterprises—should
decide who gets to speak and who doesn’t,” closely echoing
Barlow’s manifesto.
Even as the dominant discourse about technology followed
the “race-less” imaginary of the sales pitch and the ideology,
robust critiques that centered alternative, Afrofuturist visions
emerged from scholars such as Alondra Nelson. Critical writing
about the Internet has followed, demonstrating the myriad ways
race is built into digital technologies. The DOS commands of
“master” disk and “slave” disk prompt, Anna Everett points out,
reinscribe the master/slave narrative into the level of code. Recent
concerns about digital surveillance technologies draw much
from pre-digital technologies developed to control enslaved
peoples, Simone Browne has explained. Racial categories are
coded into drop-down menus and the visual culture of nearly

White nationalists see the “race-less” approach
of platforms and the technological innovation
of algorithms as opportunities to push the
“Overton window,” the range of topics tolerated
in public discourse.
continue slavery. The ideology of the contemporary alt-right is
entirely consistent with earlier manifestations of extremist White
supremacy, with only slightly modifications in style and emphasis.
This incarnation is much less steeped in Christian symbolism
(few crosses, burning or otherwise), yet trades heavily in antiSemitism. Even the Islamophobia among the alt-right has more
to do with the racialization of people who follow Islam and
the long history of connecting Whiteness to citizenship in the
U.S. than it does with beliefs about Christendom. Movement
members aim to establish a White ethno-state, consistent with
every other extremist, White nationalist movement and more
than a few mainstream politicians.
This iteration is newly enabled by algorithms, which do
several things. Algorithms deliver search results for those who
seek confirmation for racist notions and connect newcomers to
like-minded racists, as when Dylan Roof searched for “black on
white crime” and Google provided racist websites and a community of others to confirm and grow his hatred. Algorithms
speed up the spread of White supremacist ideology, as when
memes like “Pepe the Frog” travel from 4chan or Reddit to
mainstream news sites. And algorithms, aided by cable news
networks, amplify and systematically move White supremacist
talking points into the mainstream of political discourse. Like
always, White nationalists are being “innovation opportunists,”
finding openings in the latest technologies to spread their message. To understand how all this works, it’s necessary to think
about several things at once: how race is embedded in the
Internet at the same time it is ignored, how White supremacy
operates now, and the ways these interact.
62

contexts.org

every platform, Lisa Nakamura observes. The nearly ubiquitous
white hand-pointer acts as a kind of avatar that, in turn, becomes
“attached” to depictions of White people in advertisements, the
default “universal” Internet user at the keyboard that becomes
part of the collective imagination, Michele White notes. Ideas
about race are inextricably linked with the development of tech
products, such as “Blackbird” (a web browser) or “Ms. Dewey”
(a search tool), André Brock and Miriam Sweeney have written.
The $13 billion digital video gaming industry has race coded
into its interfaces and has enabled the alt-right, Kishonna Gray
observes. The algorithms of search engines and their autocomplete features often suggest racism to users and direct them to
White supremacist sites, Safiya Noble documents. And it goes
on. Yet despite all this evidence that race is coded into these
platforms, the ideology of color-blindness in technology—both
in the industry and in popular understandings of technology—
serves a key mechanism enabling White nationalists to exploit
technological innovations. By ignoring race in the design process
and eschewing discussion of it after products are launched, the
tech industry has left an opening for White nationalists—and
they are always looking for opportunities to push their ideology.

white nationalists as innovation opportunists
The filmmaker D.W. Griffith is recognized as a cinematic
visionary who helped launch an art form and an industry. His
signature film, Birth of a Nation (1915), is also widely regarded
as “disgustingly racist.” Indeed, White supremacists seized
upon it (and emerging film technology) when it was released.
At the film’s premiere, members of the Klan paraded outside
the theatre, celebrating its depiction of their group’s rise as a
sign of southern White society’s recovery
from the humiliation of defeat in the Civil
War. When Griffith screened the film at
the White House for Woodrow Wilson,
who is quoted in the film, the president
declared Birth of a Nation “history writ
with lightening.” Capitalizing on this new
technology, the KKK created film companies and produced their own feature films
with titles like The Toll of Justice (1923)
and The Traitor Within (1924), screening
them at outdoor events, churches, and schools. By the middle
of the 1920s, the Klan had an estimated five million members.
This growth was aided by White supremacists’ recognition of
the opportunity to use the new technology of motion pictures
to spread their message.
Almost a century later, another generation saw that same
potential in digital technologies. “I believe that the internet will
begin a chain reaction of racial enlightenment that will shake
the world by the speed of its intellectual conquest,” wrote
former KKK Grand Wizard David Duke on his website in 1998.
Duke’s newsletter, the NAAWP (National Association for the

Advancement of White People), was part of my earlier study,
and he was one who made the transition from the print-only era
to the digital era. Duke joined forces with Don Black, another
former KKK Grand Wizard, who shared a belief in new technologies for “racial enlightenment.” Together, they helped the
movement ditch Klan robes as the costume de rigueur of White
supremacy and trade them for high-speed modems.
Don Black created Stormfront in 1996. The site hosted a
podcast created by Duke and pushed to more than 300,000
registered users at the site. Don Black’s son recalled in a recent
interview that they were a family of early adopters, always looking for the next technological innovations that they could exploit
for the White nationalist movement:
“Pioneering white nationalism on the web was my
dad’s goal. That was what drove him from the early
’90s, from beginning of the web. We had the latest
computers, we were the first people in the neighborhood to have broadband because we had to keep
Stormfront running, and so technology and connecting people on the website, long before social media.”
Part of what I observed in the shift of the White supremacist
movement from print to digital is that they were very good,
prescient even, at understanding how to exploit emerging
technologies to further their ideological goals.
A few years after he launched Stormfront, Don Black created another, possibly even more pernicious site. In 1999, he
registered the domain name martinlutherking.org, and set up
a site that appears to be a tribute to Dr. King. But it is what I
call a “cloaked site,” a sort of precursor to today’s “fake news.”
Cloaked sites are a form of propaganda, intentionally disguising

Today’s “Whitelash” is algorithmically amplified,
sped up, and circulated to other White ethnonationalist movements around the world,
ignored all the while by a tech industry that
“doesn’t see race” in the tools it creates.
authorship in order to conceal a political agenda. I originally
discovered this one through a student’s online search during a
class; I easily figured out the source by scrolling all the way to the
bottom of the page where it clearly says “Hosted by Stormfront.”
But such sites can be deceptive: the URL is misleading and most
of us, around 85%, never scroll all the way to the bottom of a
page (all confirmed in interviews I did with young people while
they surfed the web). So we see that White nationalists, as early
adopters, are constantly looking for the vulnerabilities in new
technologies as spots into which their ideology can be inserted.
In the mid-1990s, it was domain name registration. The fact that
WINTER 2018

contexts

63

a site with clunky design can be deceptive is due in large part
to the web address. One young participant in my study said, “it
says, martin luther king dot org, so that means they must be
dedicated to that.” To him, the “dot org” suffix on the domain
name indicated that a non-profit group “dedicated to Dr. King”
was behind the URL.
White supremacists like Don Black understood that the
paradigm shift in media distribution from the old broadcast
model of “one-to-many” to Internet’s “many-to-many” model
was an opening. The kind of propaganda at the site about Dr.
King works well in this “many-to-many” sharing environment in
which there are no gatekeepers. The goal in this instance is to call
into question the hard won moral, cultural, and political victories
of the civil rights movement by undermining Dr. King’s personal
reputation. Other cloaked sites suggest that slavery “wasn’t that
bad.” This strategy, shifting the range of the acceptable ideas
to discuss, is known as moving the “Overton window.” White
nationalists of the alt-right are using the “race-less” approach
of platforms and the technological innovation of algorithms to
push the Overton window.
The anything-goes approach to racist speech on platforms
like Twitter, 4chan, and Reddit means that White nationalists
now have many places beyond Stormfront to congregate online.
These platforms have been adept in spreading White nationalist symbols and ideas, themselves accelerated and amplified by
algorithms. Take “Pepe the Frog,” an innocuous cartoon character that so thoroughly changed meaning that, in September

mentioned the connection on Twitter, White nationalists counted
it as a victory—and it was: the mention of the 4chan meme by
a “normie” on Twitter was a prank with a big attention payoff.
“In a sense, we’ve managed to push white nationalism into
a very mainstream position,” @JaredTSwift said. “Now, we’ve
pushed the Overton window,” referring to the range of ideas tolerated in public discourse. Twitter is the key platform for shaping
that discourse. “People have adopted our rhetoric, sometimes
without even realizing it. We’re setting up for a massive cultural
shift,” @JaredTSwift said. Among White supremacists, the thinking goes: if today we can get “normies” talking about Pepe
the Frog, then tomorrow we can get them to ask the other
questions on our agenda: “Are Jews people?” or “What about
black on white crime?” And, when they have a sitting President
who will re-tweet accounts that use #whitegenocide hashtags
and defend them after a deadly rally, it is fair to say that White
supremacists are succeeding at using media and technology to
take their message mainstream.

networked white rage
CNN commentator Van Jones dubbed the 2016 election a
“Whitelash,” a very real political backlash by White voters. Across
all income levels, White voters (including 53% of White women)
preferred the candidate who had retweeted #whitegenocide over
the one warning against the alt-right. For many, the uprising of
the Black Lives Matter movement coupled with the putative insult
of a Black man in the White House were such a threat to personal
and national identity that it provoked what
Carol Anderson identifies as White Rage.
In the span of U.S. racial history, the
first election of President Barack Obama
was heralded as a high point for so-called
American “race relations.” His second term
was the apotheosis of this symbolic progress. Some even suggested we were now “post-racial.” But the
post-Obama era proves the lie that we were ever post-racial, and
it may, when we have the clarity of hindsight, mark the end of
an era. If one charts a course from the Civil Rights movement,
taking 1954 (Brown v. Board of Education) as a rough starting
point and the rise of the Black Lives Matter movement and the
close of Obama’s second term as the end point, we might see
this as a five-decades-long “second reconstruction” culminating
in the 2016 presidential election..
Taking the long view makes the rise of the alt-right look
less like a unique eruption and more like a continuation of our
national story of systemic racism. Historian Rayford Logan made
the persuasive argument that retrenchment and the brutal
reassertion of White supremacy through Jim Crow laws and
the systematic violence of lynching was the White response to
“too much” progress by those just a generation from slavery.
He called this period, 1877–1920, the “nadir of American race
relations.” And the rise of the alt-right may signal the start of

Mostly White liberal writers, scholars, and
journalists report as if racism is a “bug” rather
than a “feature” of the system.
2016, the Anti-Defamation League added the character to its
database of online hate symbols. This transformation began on
4chan, moved to Twitter, and, by August 2016, it had made it
into a speech by presidential candidate Hillary Clinton.
“Turning Pepe into a white nationalist icon was one of our
original goals,” an anonymous White supremacist on Twitter
told a reporter for the Daily Beast in 2016. The move to remake
Pepe began on /r9k/, a 4chan board where a wide variety
of users, including hackers, tech guys (and they were mostly
guys), libertarians, and White supremacists who migrated from
Stormfront gathered online. The content at 4chan is eclectic,
or, as one writer put it, “a jumble of content, hosting anything
from pictures of cute kittens to wildly disturbing images and
language.” It’s also one of the most popular websites ever, with
20 million unique visitors a month, according to founder Christopher “Moot” Poole. “We basically mixed Pepe in with Nazi
propaganda, etc. We built that association [on 4chan],” a White
nationalist who goes by @JaredTSwift said. Once a journalist
64

contexts.org

a second nadir, itself a reaction to progress of Black Americans.
The difference this time is that the “Whitelash” is algorithmically
amplified, sped up, and circulated through networks to other
White ethno-nationalist movements around the world, ignored
all the while by a tech industry that “doesn’t see race” in the
tools it creates.

the tech industry, run by boy-kings steeped in cyberlibertarian
notions of freedom, racelessness, and an ethos in which the only
evil is restricting the flow of information on the Internet (and,
thereby, their profits). In the wake of Charleston and Charlottesville, it is becoming harder and harder to sell the idea of an
Internet “where there is no race… only minds.” Yet, here we
are, locked in this iron cage.

media, technology, and white nationalism
Today, there is a new technological and media paradigm
emerging and no one is sure what we will call it. Some refer to
it as “the outrage industry,” and others refer to “the mediated
construction of reality.” With great respect for these contributions, neither term quite captures the scope of what we are
witnessing, especially when it comes to the alt-right. We are
certainly no longer in the era of “one-to-many” broadcast distribution, but the power of algorithms and cable news networks
to amplify social media conversations suggests that we are no
longer in a “peer-to-peer” model either. And very little of our
scholarship has caught up in trying to explain the role that “dark
money” plays in driving all of this. For example, Rebekah Mercer (daughter of hedge-fund billionaire and libertarian Robert
Mercer), has been called the “First Lady of the Alt-Right” for her
$10-million underwriting of Brietbart News, helmed for most
of its existence by former White House Senior Advisor Steve
Bannon, who called it the “platform of the alt-right.” White
nationalists have clearly sighted this emerging media paradigm
and are seizing—and being provided with millions to help them
take hold of—opportunities to exploit these innovations with
alacrity. For their part, the tech industry has done shockingly
little to stop White nationalists, blinded by their unwillingness
to see how the platforms they build are suited for speeding us
along to the next genocide.
The second nadir, if that’s what this is, is disorienting
because of the swirl of competing articulations of racism across
a distracting media ecosystem. Yet, the view that circulates in
popular understandings of the alt-right and of tech culture by
mostly White liberal writers, scholars, and journalists is one in
which racism is a “bug” rather than a “feature” of the system.
They report with alarm that there’s racism on the Internet (or,
in the last election), as if this is a revelation, or they “journey”
into the heart of the racist right, as if it isn’t everywhere in plain
sight. Or, they write with a kind of shock mixed with reassurance
that alt-right proponents live next door, have gone to college,
gotten a proper haircut, look like a hipster, or, sometimes, put
on a suit and tie. Our understanding of the algorithmic rise of
the alt-right must do better than these quick, hot takes.
If we’re to stop the next Charlottesville or the next Emanuel
AME Church massacre, we have to recognize that the algorithms
of search engines and social media platforms facilitated these
hate crimes. To grasp the 21st century world around us involves
parsing different inflections of contemporary racism: the overt
and ideologically committed White nationalists co-mingle with

recommended resources
Christopher Bail. 2016. Terrified: How Anti-Muslim Fringe Organizations Became Mainstream. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016. A sharp, data-driven take on how the brand
of extremism that specifically targets Muslims has moved to the
center.
Yokai Benkler, et al. 2017. “Study: Brietbart-Led Right-Wing
Media System Altered Broader Media Agenda,” Columbia Journalism Review (March 3). The discussion of filter bubbles is
beset by an unfortunate both-sides-ism; this piece offers a valuable critique with its empirical take on the predominance of the
right-wing.
Alice Marwick and Rebecca Lewis. 2017. “Media manipulation
and disinformation online,” Data & Society Research Institute. An
important and wide-ranging attempt to understand a variety of
online platforms and how they have been manipulated by bad
actors.
David Neiwert. 2017. Alt-America: The Rise of the Radical Right
in the Age of Trump. Brooklyn, NY: Verso Books. Thorough
reporting and concise prose provide a compelling look at the very
American nature of the “alt-right.”
Safiya U. Nobel. 2018. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search
Engines Reinforce Racism. New York: New York University Press.
A crucial look at the way search engines and the algorithms that
power them reproduce Whiteness and discriminate against people, especially women, of color.
Whitney Phillips. 2015. This is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things:
Mapping the Relationship between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Although Phillips
now eschews the term “trolling,” this is a valuable critique and
exploration of the portion of Internet culture that provided fertile
ground for the rise of the ‘alt-right.’
Samuel C. Woolley and Phillip K. Howard. 2016. “Political Communication, Computational Propaganda, and Autonomous
Agents,” International Journal of Communication 10: 48824890. An analysis of the manipulation of information by political bots and the politics of an era in which people encounter
information architecture through devices and over the Internet
of things.
Jessie Daniels is in the sociology department at Hunter College and The Graduate
Center, City University of New York. She is the author of White Lies and Cyber Racism.

WINTER 2018

contexts

65

