+(,121/,1(
Citation:
Anupam Chander, The Racist Algorithm, 115 Mich. L. Rev.
1023 (2017)
Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline
Mon Mar 25 08:07:58 2019
-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your
acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions
of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOL/License
-- The search text of this PDF is generated from
uncorrected OCR text.
-- To obtain permission to use this article beyond the scope
of your HeinOnline license, please use:
Copyright Information
Use QR Code reader to send PDF
to your smartphone or tablet device

THE RACIST ALGORITHM?
Anupam Chander*
THE BLACK

Box

SOCIETY: THE SECRET ALGORITHMS THAT CON-

INFORMATION. By Frank Pasquale. Cambridge
and London: Harvard University Press. 2015. P. 218, $35.

TROL MONEY AND

INTRODUCTION

A pie chart satirizing Google's research and development expenditures
imagines a largely tripartite division: omniscience, omnipresence, and omnipotence.' Uber offers its staff what it calls "God View," a real-time view of
where all its users are going in a city.2 In his new book, The Black Box Society: The Hidden Algorithms That Control Money and Information, Frank Pasquale3 worries about the efforts of Silicon Valley companies to create a god
in the machine. In Pasquale's forceful telling, the pie chart is not satire, but
rather audacious ambition; he quotes Google's cofounder Sergey Brin,
"[T]he perfect search engine would be like the mind of God" (p. 187).
We are increasingly living in a Matrix that most of us do not perceive.
Pasquale is our Neo, compelling us to see the invisible digital overlords surrounding us. Pasquale does not allege the near coming of some dystopian
fantasy of a networked Borg entity keen to enslave the galaxy or a Skynet
*

Director, California International Law Center, Professor of Law and Martin Luther

King, Jr. Hall Research Scholar, University of California, Davis School of Law. I learned much
from presentations at the Intellectual Property Scholars Conference at Stanford Law School, at
a faculty workshop at UC Davis School of Law, and at seminars at Berkeley Law and Tel Aviv
University, and am grateful to Jacob Assaf, Ian Ayres, Michael Birnhack, Ben Blink, Steffi
Bryson, Deven Desai, Chris Elmendorf, Brett Frischmann, Eric Goldman, Angela Harris, Tim
Hwang, Giuseppe Labianca, Frank Pasquale, Russell Robinson, Brian Soucek, Madhavi Sunder,
Tim Wilkins, and Felix Wu for very helpful suggestions and to Jennifer Reed and Nida
Siddiqui for excellent research assistance, though the views expressed herein are mine alone. I
am grateful as well to a Google Research Award that supported related research.
1. Chartgeist, Google R&D Funding Breakdown,
small sliver of research funds is left over for doodles).

WIRED,

Nov. 2014, at 72 (note that a

2. "When new employees see the God View, they end up watching it for hours-not
because they have to, but because they're just amazed by it," Uber's CEO Travis Kalanick said.
Brian X. Chen, App-Powered Car Service Leaves Cabs in the Dust, App Stars, WIRED (Apr. 5,
2011, 7:00 AM), https://www.wired.com/2011/04/app-stars-uber/ [https://perma.cc/9UVMRNXG]. Recently, Uber had to make restrictive changes to "God View" to settle an investigation into its privacy and security practices. See Kim Bellware, Uber Settles Investigation into
Creepy 'God View' Tracking Program, HUFFINGTON POST (Jan. 6, 2016, 8:15 PM), http://www
.huffingtonpost.com/entry/uber-settlement-god-viewus568da2a6e4b0c8beacf5a46a
[https://
perma.cc/5XJQ-4YGL].
3. Professor of Law, University of Maryland; Affiliate Fellow, Information Society Project, Yale Law School; and Member, Council for Big Data, Ethics, and Society.

1023

1024

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

bent on terminating humanity. Rather, he worries that decisionmaking on
everything, from credit to employment to investments to even dating, is
passing from humans to computers.4 And these computers are remote and
invisible, their algorithms protected from scrutiny by trade secret law, invisibly and relentlessly manipulating us for the benefit of corporate profit or
worse (pp. 6-14). Pasquale shows that corporations often rebuff efforts to
examine the algorithms they employ, and the law abets corporations in this
task (Chapter Five).
Pasquale is part of a line of recent scholarship attacking the increasing
role of automated algorithms in our lives-indeed, legal scholars are increasingly sounding the alarm on this unfettered algorithmic control. Jonathan
Zittrain worries that a company like Facebook could even decide an election
without anyone ever finding out.' Ryan Calo warns that companies may be
manipulating us through advertising. 6 Call this the problem of algorithmic
7
manipulation.
I will argue that despite his careful and important account, Pasquale's
"black box society" frame lends itself to a misdiagnosis of the discrimination
problem likely to lie in algorithmic decisionmaking. This misdiagnosis leads
to the wrong prescription-namely, an often-quixotic search for algorithmic
transparency.8 Furthermore, the transparency that Pasquale's argument can
be read to support is the wrong sort: a transparency in the design of the
algorithm. (I should make clear that Pasquale himself is more nuanced, calling for a discussion of the kinds of transparency we should demand; he asks:
"How much does the black box firm have to reveal? To whom must it reveal
it? And how fast . . . ?" (p. 142).) Even a transparent, facially neutral algorithm can still produce discriminatory results.9 What we need instead is a
transparencyof inputs and results, which allows us to see that the algorithm is
4. Danielle Citron has made a similar observation about the increasing role of computers in decisionmaking by public sector entities. Danielle Keats Citron, Technological Due

Process, 85

WASH.

U. L. REV. 1249 (2008).

Jonathan Zittrain, Facebook Could Decide an Election Without Anyone Ever Finding
(June 1, 2014), https://newrepublic.com/article/117878/information-fiduciary-solution-facebook-digital -gerrymandering (on file with Michigan Law Review).
5.

Out,

NEW REPUBLIC

6. Ryan Calo, Digital Market Manipulation, 82 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 995 (2014).
7. Intentional discrimination is not the only complaint cited against algorithmic decisionmaking. Anne Cheung observes that Google's autocomplete function can sometimes result
in distressing results. She argues that Google and others should be liable for defamatory
autocompletes that are algorithmically generated if they fail to take down the particular
autocomplete even after being notified of its allegedly defamatory nature. Anne S.Y. Cheung,
Defaming by Suggestion: Searchingfor Search Engine Liability in the Autocomplete Era, in COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVES ON THE FUNDAMENTAL FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION 467 (Andrds Koltay
ed., 2015).
8. Pasquale recognizes the possibility of algorithms too complex to understand-what
he calls the "sweet mystery of machine learning." Frank Pasquale, Bittersweet Mysteries of Machine Learning (A Provocation),LONDON SCH. ECON. & POL. ScI.: MEDIA POL'Y PROJECT BLOG
(Feb. 5, 2016), http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/mediapolicyproject/2016/02/05/bittersweet-mysteries-ofmachine-learning-a-provocation/ [https://perma.cc/XSS9-2D58].
9.

See discussion infra Part II.

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

generating discriminatory impact. If we know that the results of an algorithm are systematically discriminatory, then we know enough to seek to
redesign the algorithm or to distrust its results. The distinction is similar to
the evidentiary difference between demonstrating disparate treatment and
demonstrating disparate impact.'0 My central claim is this: if we believe that
the real-world facts, on which algorithms are trained and operate, are deeply
suffused with invidious discrimination, then our prescription to the problem of racist or sexist" algorithms is algorithmic affirmative action. Thus, the
problem is not the black box, which is often more neutral than the human
decisionmaker it replaces, but the real world on which it operates. We must
design our algorithms for a world permeated with the legacy of discriminations past and the reality of discriminations present.
The importance of getting this right is clear. Facebook now owns a patent on a process by which a user can be denied a loan because of the
creditworthiness of his or her friends. 12 IBM purports to offer an algorithm
that can distinguish refugee from terrorist, "the sheep from the wolves."'"
10. While casting some doubt on the continuing validity of disparate impact justifications for civil rights remedies in its 2009 decision in Ricci v. DeStefano, 557 U.S. 557 (2009),
the Supreme Court in its latest ruling on issues of race upheld a disparate-impact-based theory
of civil rights violations under the Fair Housing Act. There the Court distinguished disparate
treatment and disparate impact theories as follows: "In contrast to a disparate-treatment case,
where a 'plaintiff must establish that the defendant had a discriminatory intent or motive,' a
plaintiff bringing a disparate-impact claim challenges practices that have a 'disproportionately
adverse effect on minorities' and are otherwise unjustified by a legitimate rationale." Tex.
Dep't of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc., 135 S.Ct. 2507, 2533 (2015)
(quoting Ricci, 557 U.S. at 577). The Court warned that remedying disparate impacts through
explicit "racial quotas" would raise "serious constitutional concerns." Id. at 2523. On the contemporary use of disparate impact in classifications, see Samuel R. Bagenstos, DisparateImpact
and the Role of Classificationand Motivation in Equal Protection Law After Inclusive Communities, 101 CORNELL L. REV. 1115 (2016).
11. For economy only, I will speak in terms of race- and gender-based discrimination,
though I intend my argument to be more broadly applicable across the array of prohibited
discrimination criteria. For an example of work examining age-based discrimination (in the
context of credit scoring), see FAISAL KAMIRAN & TOON CALDERS, CLASSIFYING WITHOUT
DISCRIMINATING (2009), http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ielx5/4850420/4909154/04909197.pdfftp=&
arnumber=4909197&isnumber-4909154 [https://perma.ccWZ3D-ZLVA].
12. Hazel Sheffield, Facebook's New PatentCould Mean You Are Denied a Loan Because of
Your Friends, INDEPENDENT (Sept. 2, 2015), http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/
news/facebooks-new-patent-could-mean-you-are-denied-a-loan-because-of-your-friends- 1048
2622.html [https://perma.ec/2R8K-EE5Q]; Mark Sullivan, Facebook Patents Technology to Help
Lenders Discriminate Against Borrowers Based on Social Connections, VENTUREBEAT (Aug. 4,
2015, 12:15 PM), http://venturebeat.com/2015/08/04/facebook-patents-technology-to-helplenders-discriminate-against-borrowers-based-on-social-connections/
[https://perma.cc/C2L
K-VPLY].
13. Patrick Tucker, Refugee or Terrorist? IBM Thinks Its Software Has the Answer, DEF.
ONE (Jan. 27, 2016), http://www.defenseone.com/technology/2016/01/refugee-or-terroristibm-thinks-its-software-has-answer/125484/ [https://perma.cc/S27J-KR6S]. We also see the
emergence of preemptive policing algorithms, which may have the effect of increasingly targeting minority neighborhoods, thus subjecting minorities to greater surveillance, and perhaps
greater risk of accidental or wrongful use of police force. See Kelly K. Koss, Note, Leveraging
Predictive PolicingAlgorithms to Restore FourthAmendment Protections in High-Crime Areas in

1026

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

Retailers can increasingly target certain shoppers for discounts. 14 Law enforcement officers are using "predictive policing" algorithms to identify "hot
people" who might have a greater propensity to commit crime.' s Judges are
employing algorithms in sentencing.' 6 As Pasquale describes, Google's search
and Facebook's presentation algorithms determine what information we see
(p. 82). The possibilities of discriminatory manipulation are legion. 17 Pasquale worries that the rise of algorithmic decisionmaking will make racism
and other discrimination even more difficult to ferret out, hidden behind
subtle manipulations that are nearly impossible to discern for ordinary citizens not privy to the internal computer code (p. 38). "It [c]reates [i]nvisible
[plowers," he warns (p. 193).
Pasquale's warning comes at a time when the #BlackLivesMatter campaign and other recent events have made the reality of racial- and genderbased discrimination in our society painfully clear.' 8 In one famous experiment, job applicants with white-sounding names, such as Emily, received 50
percent more callbacks than those with African American-sounding names,
such as Lakisha.' 9 A study of emails sent to mortgage loan originators asking
for loans found that African American-sounding names effectively reduced
an applicant's credit score by 71 points (on a scale going up to 750).20 A
2012 federal government report found that both African Americans and
Asian Americans were shown 17.7 percent fewer homes than equally
a Post-Wardlow World, 90 CHI.-KENT L. REV. 301, 321 (2015) (describing how high-crime
areas are disproportionately low-income, minority neighborhoods across the United States).
14. Joseph Turow & Lee McGuigan, Retailing and Social Discrimination: The New Normal?, in DATA AND DISCRIMINATION: COLLECTED ESSAYS 27, 29 (Seeta Pefia Gangadharan ed.,
2014), https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/public-comments/2014/10/00078-92938
.pdf [https://perma.cc/K7B7-P6X8].
15. John Eligon & Timothy Williams, Police Program Aims to Pinpoint Those Most Likely
to Commit Crimes, N.Y. TIMES (Sept. 24, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/25/us/police-program-aims-to-pinpoint-those-most-likely-to-commit-crimes.html (on file with Michigan Law Review).
16. E.g., State v. Loomis, 881 N.W.2d 749, 754-55 (Wis. 2016) (evaluating the use of an
algorithm that purports to predict whether an criminal defendant will reoffend).
17. The possibility of manipulation is heightened because many do not even recognize
that their experiences with a particular process are determined by a human-coded algorithm.
18. See e.g., Mario L. Barnes et al., A Post-Race Equal Protection?, 98 GEO. L.J. 967,
982-92 (2010) (collecting statistics demonstrating persistence of racism).
19. Marianne Bertrand & Sendhil Mullainathan, Are Emily and Greg More Employable
than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,94 AM. ECON.
REV. 991, 997-99 (2004).
20. Andrew Hanson et al., Discrimination in Mortgage Lending: Evidence from a Correspondence Experiment, 92 J. URB. ECON. 48, 62 (2016) ("We find that [mortgage loan originators] ... are less likely to respond to inquiries from clients with African American names than
they are to clients with white names. We also find that [originators] . . . are likely to write a
preferential e-mail to white clients."); cf John Leland, Baltimore Finds Subprime Crisis Snags
Women, N.Y. TIMES, Jan. 15, 2008, at Al, http:// www.nytimes.com/2008/01/15/us/15mortgage
.html (disproportionate amount of Baltimore's subprime home loans have gone to women
regardless of their income or credit scores).

1027

The Racist Algorithm?

April 2017]

qualified white Americans. 21 A 2015 federal government study found yet
other invidious discrimination in housing: housing providers tell deaf or
hard-of-hearing homeseekers about fewer units than similar homeseekers
who are not deaf.22 Homeseekers who use wheelchairs are more likely to be
denied an appointment to view rental housing in buildings with accessible
units, and when given an appointment, are less likely to be shown suitable
housing units than homeseekers who are ambulatory. 23 In a society where
discrimination affects opportunities in innumerable ways, we must worry
about the migration of discrimination to decisionmaking by algorithm.
This Review proceeds as follows. Part I reviews Pasquale's argument that
our emerging black box society will increase discriminatory manipulations.
It argues that, contrary to Pasquale's argument, instead of seeing algorithms
as likely to increase intentional discrimination, the law has turned to algorithms to reduce the invidious discriminations that result from human decisionmakers with unfettered discretion. Through the example of sentencing
guidelines, this Part demonstrates that law has preferred highly specified algorithmic decisionmaking in order to reduce the discriminatory results of
open-ended human judgment. Part II argues that because of the real-world
discrimination upon which the algorithms learn and operate, discrimination
is still likely to emerge from automated algorithms that are designed in racially or gender-neutral fashion. Part III introduces the remedy of algorithmic affirmative action to combat the problem of viral
discrimination-designing algorithms in race- and gender-conscious ways
to account for existing discrimination lurking in the data.
I.

ALGORITHMIC MANIPULATION

Pasquale deploys two striking Platonic metaphors to illustrate his concerns. First, he sees the data industry as wearing a ring of invisibility: "Black
box insiders are protected as if they are wearing a Ring of Gyges-which
grants its wearers invisibility but, Plato warns us in The Republic, is also an
open invitation to bad behavior" (p. 190). Second, Pasquale posits the rest of
us ordinary people as prisoners in Plato's allegory of the cave, forced to stare
at a stony wall "flickering shadows cast by a fire behind them" (p. 190).
Pasqaule concludes:
[We prisoners in the cave] cannot comprehend the actions, let alone the
agenda, of those who create the images that are all [we] know of reality.
Like those who are content to use black box technology without
21.

MARGARET AUSTIN TURNER ET AL., U.S. DEP'T OF

Hous. & URBAN

DEV., HOUSING

DISCRIMINATION AGAINST RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITIES 2012, at xvii (2013), http://www
.huduser.gov/portal/Publications/pdf/HUD-514_HDS2012.pdf [https://perma.cc/NJU4-L4B6].
22.

DIANE K. LEVY ET AL., U.S. DEP'T OF

Hous. & URBAN DEV.,

DISCRIMINATION IN THE

RENTAL HOUSING MARKET AGAINST PEOPLE WHO ARE DEAF AND PEOPLE WHO USE WHEEL-

37-42 (2015), https://www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/housing-discrimination-disability.pdf [https://perma.cc/4N6D-GYVK].
CHAIRS: NATIONAL STUDY FINDINGS

23. Id. at 42-52.

1028

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

understanding it, [we] can see mesmerizing results, but [we] have no way
to protect [ourselves] from manipulation or exploitation (p. 190).
Given the persistence of widespread racial and gender discrimination in
the twenty-first century, should we not expect algorithms often programmed by racist and sexist programmers to manipulate us towards accepting
racist and sexist decisions? Are programmers likely to manipulate algorithms
to exacerbate existing discrimination in society? For a half-dozen reasons, I
believe the answer is no. (Pasquale, I should note, does not suggest either
rogue programmers or malign bosses, but the concern about algorithmic
manipulation might be interpreted that way.)
First, because much of societal discrimination is subconscious or unconscious, it is less likely to be encoded into automated algorithms than the
human decisionmakers that the algorithms replace.2 4 Much of recent research into racial bias has moved toward exposing its existence without focusing on whether it is conscious or not. Implicit association testing has
revealed the prevalence of bias across the community." As Jerry Kang writes,
26
"[W]e may all be infected in ways we cannot admit, even to ourselves."
27
Research focused on implicit bias often posits that the bias is unconscious.
The Supreme Court in 2015 recognized that "unconscious prejudices" can
motivate discrimination. 28 Unconscious discrimination is far less likely to
manifest itself through the process of programming than through the
process of decisionmaking. Programming requires a step-by-step writing
Susan T. Fiske & Ann Marie Russell, Cognitive Processes,in THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF
115, 124 (John F. Dovidio et al. eds., 2010)
("Subtle, unexamined stereotyping is more automatic, ambiguous, and ambivalent than common sense would assume.").
25. See Audrey J. Lee, Unconscious Bias Theory in Employment DiscriminationLitigation,
40 HARV. C.R.-C.L. L. REV. 481, 482 (2005) ("A burgeoning body of social science literature
has empirically demonstrated the existence and prevalence of unconscious bias in today's society."). See generally Anthony G. Greenwald & Linda Hamilton Krieger, Implicit Bias: Scientific
Foundations, 94 CALIF. L. REV. 945 (2006); Justin D. Levinson, Forgotten Racial Equality: Implicit Bias, Decisionmaking, and Misremembering, 57 DUKE L.J. 345, 352 (2007) ("[Ilmplicit
biases are real, pervasive, and difficult to change.").
26. Jerry Kang, Trojan Horses of Race, 118 HARV. L. REV. 1489, 1496 (2005). Kang cites a
landmark article by Charles Lawrence, who wrote that "the illness of racism infects almost
everyone." Charles R. Lawrence III, The Id, the Ego, and Equal Protection:Reckoning with Unconscious Racism, 39 STAN. L. REV. 317, 321 (1987).
27. Consider the description offered recently by Song Richardson and Phillip Goff: "We
use the term implicit racial biases to refer both to unconscious stereotypes (beliefs about social
groups) and attitudes (feelings, either positive or negative, about social groups). Implicit stereotypes and attitudes result from the practice we get associating groups (e.g., blacks) with
traits (e.g., criminality)." L. Song Richardson & Phillip Atiba Goff, Implicit Racial Bias in
Public Defender Triage, 122 YALE L.J. 2626, 2630 (2013). Richardson and Goff suggest that
implicit bias stems from prevalent media and other cultural portrayals: "This practice stems
from repeated exposures to cultural stereotypes that are ubiquitous within a given society." Id.
28. Tex. Dep't of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc., 135 S.Ct. 2507,
2511-12 (2015) ("Recognition of disparate-impact liability under the FHA plays an important
role in uncovering discriminatory intent: it permits plaintiffs to counteract unconscious
prejudices and disguised animus that escape easy classification as disparate treatment.").
24.

PREJUDICE, STEREOTYPING AND DISCRIMINATION

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

1029

process that depends on a conscious understanding of what is sought. 29 Not
only must the programmer instruct the computer with great precision, but
modern programming practices also require the programmer to document
(or annotate) what the program is doing.30 Because of a programming process that requires both writing down explicit instructions and documenting
what particular code does, unconscious or subconscious discrimination is
less likely to manifest itself in computer programming than in human
decisionmaking.
31
Return to Bertrand and Mullainathan's famous resume experiment.
Would a computer share the same biases in deciding whom to call back,
preferring Emily and Greg over equally qualified Lakisha and Jamal? That
depends, of course, on whether the computer could divine the race of the
applicants from their name. It seems hard to imagine that programmers
would teach an algorithm to distinguish race from the name of an applicant.
Given laws barring racial discrimination in employment, such programming
would smack of intentional racial discrimination and would prove devastating in a trial for any discrimination claim.32 A computer program would
thus not likely guess the race of the applicant from the names Emily, Greg,
Lakisha, and Jamal-a guess that many humans would make, perhaps subconsciously. Callbacks by computer algorithm seem less likely to discriminate than human resources personnel, with their hidden and often
unconscious biases.
Second, even for programmers or companies who intend to discriminate, the process of coding itself is likely to cause programmers to shy away
from actually encoding the discrimination. Even absent compelled disclosure through litigation, there is the danger that a hard-coded discrimination
will be revealed later by hackers or by insiders disgusted by the discrimination. Moreover, because code writing is likely to involve teams of programmers sharing code, with different persons reviewing and debugging code,
consciously coding discrimination will likely require obtaining the cooperation of multiple persons, which is likely to be a fraught task. None of this
denies the existence of racist and sexist programmers. Recently, Mark
Zuckerberg repudiated some Facebook employees who replaced declarations
33
of "Black Lives Matter" on company walls with "All Lives Matter."
29. Computer Programming, U.R.I. DEP'T COMPUTER SCI. & STAT., http://homepage.cs
.uri.edu/book/programming/programming.htm [https://perma.cc/K8Y2-GND9].
30. Id. (breaking down programming into five steps: defining the problem, planning the
solution, coding the program, testing the program, and documenting the program).
31.

Bertrand & Mullainathan, supra note 19 and accompanying text.

32. 42 U.S.C. ยง 2000e-2(a) (2012) ("It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an
employer.., to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges
of employment, because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national
origin .... ).
33. Michael Nunez, Mark ZuckerbergAsks Racist Facebook Employees to Stop CrossingOut
Black Lives Matter Slogans, GIZMODO.COM (Feb. 25, 2016, 12:42 PM), http://gizmodo.com/

Michigan Law Review

1030

[Vol. 115:1023

Third, even if corporations engage in other kinds of wrongdoing, that
does not mean that they are likely to intentionally manipulate algorithms to
invidiously discriminate. Christian Sandvig and his coauthors argue that history indicates that we should be distrustful of some of the major operators
of algorithms:
Almost every major operator of an Internet platform, including Google,
Twitter, Facebook, Microsoft, and Apple, has already been investigated by
the U.S. government for violations that include anti-competitive behavior,
deceptive business practices, failing to protect the personal information of
consumers, failing to honor promises made to consumers about their own
34
data, and charging customers for purchases that they did not authorize.
The history that Sandvig and his coauthors cite, however, does not reveal
intentional racial or gender discrimination. Certainly, many have rightly
pointed to concerns about the demographics of high-tech workplaces, where
certain minorities and women are not represented as well as they are in the
general population.35
Fourth, the process must be compared with non-algorithmic decisionmaking-that is, decisionmaking by human beings. The ultimate black box
is the human mind. Even where decisions are made by committee, the deliberations are typically not recorded except in highly selective minutes, and
the members of the committee often pledge to hold discussions secret.
Prejudices acted upon in this black box never have to be written down. Consider Zittrain's concern about Facebook's manipulation of its newsfeed to
favor one candidate or another in an election. 6 The decision as to what
constitutes news has previously been the realm of editorial desks in television stations, magazines, and newspapers-hardly a guarantee of political
neutrality. How many elections have actually been swayed by human editorial decisions as to what to reveal or highlight? Even one of the most trusted
newspapers in the country, the New York Times, withheld "a blockbuster
story . . . about a secret Bush administration program to eavesdrop on
Americans
3 7 without warrants" until after the November 2004 presidential
election.

Fifth, if human beings act on stereotypes formed through a process of
statistical discrimination, automated algorithms acting on a richer information environment may not be subject to similar individually erroneous statistical discrimination. Lior Strahilevitz has argued that much of the
mark-zuckerberg-asks-racist-facebook-employees-to-stop- 1761272768
U-FQTS].

34.
LECTED

Christian Sandvig et al., An Algorithm Audit, in

[https://perma.cc/JT2

DATA AND DISCRIMINATION: COL-

ESSAYS, supra note 14, at 6, 7-8.

35. Patricia Leigh Brown, Silicon Valley, Seeking Diversity, Focuses on Blacks, N.Y. TIMES
(Sept. 3, 2015), http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/04/technology/silicon-valley-seeking-diversity-focuses-on-blacks.html (on file with Michigan Law Review).
36.

Zittrain, supra note 5.

37. See Margaret Sullivan, Lessons in a Surveillance Drama Redux, N.Y. TIMEs, Nov. 9,
2013, at 12.

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

discrimination that prevails in contemporary society is a result of statistical
discrimination, where, for example, "in the absence of accurate information
about individuals' criminal histories, employers who are interested in weeding out those with criminal records will rely instead on racial and gender
proxies."38 A more comprehensive portrait of an individual might allow algorithms to avoid falling prey to racial or gender stereotypes (though, as I
discuss in Part II below, this is hardly inevitable).
Finally, worries about the black box of human decisionmaking have led
turns in the past. When Facebook was accused of favoring
algorithmic
to
liberal political views in the news stories it identified as "trending," it sought
its news editors
to clearly demonstrate its commitment to fairness by firing
39
algorithm.
automated
an
with
fully
them
replacing
and
Consider the history of the federal sentencing guidelines, to which we
now turn. In 1976, Senator Edward Kennedy declared the sentencing disparities resulting from the indeterminate sentencing of federal crimes by judges
"a national scandal.NO In the volume of Judicaturepublished the year before,
state judge Joseph C. Howard observed that "[flindings in other fields converge on the fact that cultural distance tends to determine attitude and tolerance, and the greater the distance in this respect, the greater the tendency for
41
imagination and bias to influence judgment and decisions.." Criminal justice scholar Albert Alschuler echoed the worry: "Whenever discretion is
granted, it will be abused. In some instances, individual differences in culpability will be less important than differences in race, class, lifestyle and other
irrelevancies." 42 As Kate Stith and Steven Koh describe in their history of this
period, "[D]iscrepancy in sentences was said to be fundamentally at odds
with ideals of equality and the rule of law. In particular, permitting judges
and parole officials to exercise unguided discretion resulted in 'unwarranted
38.

See Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Privacy Versus Antidiscrimination,75 U. CHI. L. REV. 363,

364 (2008).
39. Annalee Newitz, Facebook Fires Human Editors, Algorithm Immediately Posts Fake
News, ARs TECHNICA (Aug. 29, 2016, 2:20 PM), http://arstechnica.com/business/2016/08/
facebook-fires- human-editors-algorithm-immediately-posts-fake- news/ [https://perma.cc/
8BT6-LW9C]; Search FYI: An Update to Trending, FACEBOOK NEWSROOM (Aug. 26, 2016) http:/
[https://perma.cc/Y693/newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/08/search-fyi-an-update-to-trending!
RJAF] (Facebook explains changes where human editors will "make fewer individual decisions
about topics"); see also Mike Isaac, Facebook, FacingBias Claims, Shows How Editors and Algorithms Guide News, N.Y. TIMES (May 12, 2016), http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/13/technology/facebook-guidelines-trending-topics.html (on file with Michigan Law Review) (providing
background on the criticism Facebook was receiving); FACEBOOK, TRENDING REVIEW GUIDELINES (2016), https://fbnewsroomus.files.wordpress.com/2016/05/ful-trending-review-guidelines.pdf [https://perma.cc/MP29-GB5U] (Facebook's public news team guidelines, released
after the public criticism of bias).
40. Edward M. Kennedy, Criminal Sentencing: A Game of Chance, 60 JUDICATURE 208,
210 (1976).
41. Joseph C. Howard, Racial Discrimination in Sentencing, 59 JUDICATURE 121, 122
(1975).
42. Albert W. Alschuler, Sentencing Reform and ProsecutorialPower: A Critiqueof Recent
Proposalsfor "Fixed" and "Presumptive" Sentencing, 126 U. PA. L. REv. 550, 563 (1978).

1032

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

disparity' (including alleged bias against minorities) in criminal sentences." 43
Motivated in part by concerns over sentencing disparities resulting from the
largely unfettered sentencing discretion granted to federal judges, Congress,
in 1984, created the United States Sentencing Commission, charging it to
promulgate sentencing policies that would help "avoid unwarranted sentencing disparities among defendants with similar records who have been
found guilty of similar criminal conduct. ' 44 The Sentencing Guidelines
made the process of determining a sentence more algorithmic, based on the
nature of the offense and various other features of the crime and the criminal. Presaging the concern about viral discrimination hidden in data, Congress had heard concerns that the sentencing algorithm itself might
unintentionally utilize race through other factors that might serve as hidden
proxies for race. 45 Today, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines Manual spans
some 600 pages, complete with extensive tables and indices. 46
Despite these efforts, sentencing based on ranges determined by algorithm did not end discrimination and might have made the lives of African American convicted criminals (like white American convicted criminals)
worse through lengthier mandatory minimums. Experience with the Sentencing Guidelines does not suggest an unequivocal story of human invidious discriminations restrained by highly specified algorithms. Stith and Koh
worry that by reducing human discretion, the Sentencing Guidelines made
minorities worse off because their individual circumstances could not be
properly considered. 47 Indeed, the Guidelines themselves had rules that
treated crack cocaine-more popular with African American drug addictsmore harshly than powder cocaine-more popular with white American

43. Kate Stith & Steve Y. Koh, The Politics of Sentencing Reform: The Legislative History of
the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 28 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 223, 227 (1993).
44. Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-473, tit. II, ch. 2, 98 Stat. 1987 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 18 and 28 U.S.C.).
45. Before a Congressional Subcommittee on Criminal Laws and Procedures, attorney
Pierce O'Donnell testified along with law professors Michael Churgin and Dennis Curtis:
Under ยง 994(d), the Sentencing Commission is required to consider certain factors in
classifying categories of offenders for purposes of its sentencing guidelines. Some of these
factors include the offender's education, family and community ties, vocational skills and
previous employment records. The Subcommittee, we are sure, is aware of the care which
must be used in employing such considerations. Not only are there serious doubts about
the utility of some of these factors in making assessments of risk of recidivism. There is
also the potential for inadvertent discrimination on the basis of race and income.
Reform of the Federal Criminal Laws: Hearing on S. 1473 Before the Subcomm. On Criminal
Laws & Procedures of the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 95th Cong. 8913 (1977). Harvard Law
Professor Alan Dershowitz agreed, declaring that he "would hope that [the members appointed to the Sentencing Commission] would reflect the wide and rich diversity ethnically
and in terms of gender and race that we have in this country." Id. at 9051.
46.

See

47.

Stith & Koh, supra note 43, at 287.

U.S. SENTENCING GUIDELINES MANUAL (U.S. SENTENCING COMM'N 2015).

The Racist Algorithm?

April 20171

drug addicts. 48 Nearly two decades after their adoption, Federal District
Judge Myron Thompson complained, "If the 600-plus pages of the most
us anything, it is that punishrecent set of sentencing guidelines have taught
49
"
algorithm.
an
to
reduced
be
ment cannot
In a recent case, an individual facing a six-year prison term challenged
the sentencing judge's use of an algorithmic tool called "COMPAS," arguing
that the algorithm was based on group data, that the algorithm took gender
into account, and that the algorithm's proprietary nature prevented him
from challenging its validity. 0 The Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld the
use of the algorithm, within narrow parameters, arguing that "consideration
of a COMPAS risk assessment at sentencing along with other supporting
factors is helpful in providing the sentencing court with as much informa'
tion as possible in order to arrive at an individualized sentence. 51 With respect to gender, the court concluded that "COMPAS's use of gender
promotes accuracy that ultimately inures to the benefit of the justice system
including defendants."52 Meanwhile, a ProPublica investigation challenged
COMPAS as "likely to falsely flag black defendants as future criminals,
wrongly labeling them this way at almost twice the rate as white
5 3

defendants.."

In the context of decisions made by governments that are subject to
constitutional obligations of due process, there is reason to allow individuals
4
to review any algorithms that are crucial parts of that decisionmaking1 In
such circumstances, the government's interest in protecting trade secrets
seems an inadequate reason to refuse to inform citizens of why the government took decisions that seriously impact their lives. Perhaps concerns
48. David A. Sklansky, Essay, Cocaine, Race, and Equal Protection, 47 STAN. L. Rav. 1283,
1287-89 (1995) ("The 100:1 ratio between the sentencing thresholds for powder cocaine and
crack is mirrored in the Sentencing Guidelines promulgated in 1987.").
49. Myron H. Thompson, Sentencing and Sensibility, N.Y. TiMES, (Jan. 21, 2005), http://
[https://perma.cc/
www.nytimes.com/2005/01/2 1/opinion/sentencing-and-sensibility.html
BSZ6-YAP6].
50.

State v. Loomis, 881 N.W.2d 749, 754-57 (Wis. 2016).

51.

Id. at 765.

52.

Id. at 767.

Machine Bias, PROPUBLICA (May 23, 2016), https://www
53. See Julia Angwin et al.,
[https://perma
.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
.cc/5HBK-MUJR]. The company behind COMPAS has contested this claim. Northpointe's Response to ProPublica:DemonstratingAccuracy Equity and Predictive Party,NORTHPOINTE, http:/
/www.northpointeinc.com/northpointe-analysis [https://perma.cc/L2PP-Vj5D]. ProPublica's
reporters stand by their original claim. Julia Angwin & Jeff Larson, ProPublicaResponds to
Company's Critique of Machine Bias Story, PROPUBLICA (July 29, 2016, 11:56 AM), https://
www.propublica.org/article/propublica-responds-to-companys-critique-of-machine-bias-story
[https://perma.cc/6S29-98F4].
54. The European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, set to take effect in 2018,
offers a broader promise of transparency: "The data subject shall have the right not to be
subject to a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which produces legal effects concerning him or her or similarly significantly affects him or her." Commission Regulation 2016/679, art 22, para. 1, 2016 O.J. (L 119) 1, 46 (EU).

1034

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

about manipulation if the algorithm is disclosed might justify keeping a particular algorithm secret-for example, an algorithm that singles out whom
to scrutinize more carefully in an airport screening process. 5 5
Pasquale recognizes that institutions have, at times, turned to algorithms
to replace biased human decisionmakers. He argues that this algorithmic
turn has, however, proven inadequate, offering the example of finance: "Algorithmic methods of reducing judgment to a series of steps were supposed
to rationalize finance, replacing self-serving or biased intermediaries with
sound decision frameworks. And they did reduce some inefficiencies. But
they also ended up firmly building in some dubious old patterns of credit
castes and corporate unaccountability" (p. 15). Pasquale's worry seems wellplaced with respect to the adoption of sentencing guidelines-the formulation of the new algorithm itself may have solved some problems of subconscious bias among judges, but created others, with a possible overall adverse
impact on minorities.
Pasquale raises another critical concern with the algorithmic turn: when
algorithms replace human decisionmaking, algorithms give the decisionmaking "a patina of inevitability" (p. 15), and indeed a patina of fairness.
Algorithms can make decisionmaking seem fair precisely because computers
are logical entities which should not be infected by all-too-human bias. But
that would be an unwarranted assumption, as we now discuss.
II.

VIRAL DISCRIMINATION

Can a search engine peer into our souls? Consider one account: "Within
the confines of a search bar you can ask questions or express opinions you
would never admit to in public. Our most popular searches are, to some
degree, an uncensored chronicle of what, as a society, we're thinking but not
necessarily saying." 56 Google's autocomplete function uses prior searches of
others to help predict what you are searching for,57 and in this unexpected
way, becomes a window into the questions that large numbers of people are
asking "when they think no-one is looking."5 The United Nations cleverly
utilized Google's autocomplete function to reflect back to us our own sexist
55.

E.g., Ethan Zuckerman, TSA Pre-Check, Fairness and Opaque Algorithms....
My
AccRA (Sept. 5, 2012), http://www.ethanzuckerman.com/blog/2012/O9/O5/tsa-precheck-fairness-and-opaque-algorithms/ [https://perma.cc/P6MM-FRF9] ("[I]f we discover
that flying 20 times in a year is a key factor for clearance into the program, it's easy to imagine
an adversary flying 20 times with clean hand baggage and a bomb smuggled on the 21st
flight.").
56. Arwa Mahdawi, Google's Autocomplete Spells Out Our Darkest Thoughts, GUARDIAN
(Oct. 22, 2013, 5:39 PM), http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/22/googleautocomplete-un-women-ad-discrimination-algorithm [https://perma.cc/H6VT-2SXP].
57. Id.
HEART'S IN

58.

New UN Campaigns Use Google Search Results to Reveal Prevalence of Sexism and

Homophobia, UNITED NATIONS HUM. RTS. OPF. HIGH COMMISSIONER (Oct. 31, 2013), http://
www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/NewUNcampaignsuseGooglesearch.aspx#sthash.Gk 1la3
YO.dpuf [https://perma.cc/H6UM-UHVK] ("UN Women recently launched a clever ad campaign designed to highlight the prevalence of sexist attitudes.").

The Racist Algorithm?

April 2017]

attitudes towards women via an advertising campaign, an example of which
appears below in Figure 1.
FIGURE

1. UN WOMEN AD

CAMPAIGN USING GOOGLE'S

AUTOCOMPLETE FUNCTION

59

59. UN Women Ad Series Reveals Widespread Sexism, UN WOMEN (Oct. 21, 2013), http://
www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2013/10/women-should-ads [https://perma.cc/L9ZU-RX2
G].

1036

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

The United Nations' advertisements demonstrate how a neutral algorithm can produce sexist results simply because it responds to inputs from
sexist people. More generally, ostensibly neutral algorithms can produce results that reflect the prejudices of society. Thus, even if algorithms are less
likely than the human decisionmakers they replace to be afflicted by
prejudice, algorithms can still further entrench discrimination through other
means. Even facially neutral algorithms will produce discriminatory results
because they train and operate on the real world of pervasive discrimination.
FIGURE

2.

ROUTES OF INFECTION IN ALGORITHMIC DECISIONMAKING

Traininp Data

(Re-al World.)
L

"Uk
1%

Operdtille,

Data(Real,
Worldl

p

classificatioll

I

Pasquale's manipulative algorithm critique contrasts with another
emerging critique-that algorithms simply compound the errors of the past
(call this the problem of viral discrimination). Algorithms trained or operated on a real-world data set that necessarily reflects existing discrimination
may well replicate that discrimination.
Figure 2 shows the routes of infection in an algorithm's decisionmaking-from training data and operating data to the algorithm itself. As Faisal
Kamiran and Toon Calders write, "Classification models are trained on the
historical data for the prediction of the class labels of unknown data samples. Often, however, the historical data is biased towards certain groups or
classes of objects." 60 Solon Barocas and Andrew Seibst demonstrate a variety
of mechanisms through which algorithmic decisionmaking in employment
can lead to disparate impact against protected classes. 61 For example, algorithms might utilize ostensibly neutral data, but that data may turn out to be
subject to what Cynthia Dwork and her colleagues have called "redundant
encodings," where membership in a particular class is encoded in other data

60. Kamiran & Calders, supra note 11, at 1.
61. See Solon Barocas & Andrew D. Selbst, Big Data's Disparate Impact, 104
REv. 671 (2016).

CALIF.

L.

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

1037

that can seem, on its face, neutral. 62 With redundant encodings, race or gender can even be inferred from datasets that do not explicitly collect information on race and gender. Latanya Sweeney has demonstrated that automated
algorithms can generate racially problematic outcomes even if that was not
the intent of the algorithms' programmers. 63 Sweeney has established that
algorithmic online advertisements can unintentionally propagate discrimination, with African American-sounding names more likely to generate advertisements that relate to arrest records than names typically associated
with white Americans. 64 Such discrimination arises not from the racist inbut from the algotentions of the advertising algorithms' programmers,
6s
rithms' natural operation in the real world.
Pasquale is sensitive to the problem of bad data, rather than intentionally bad algorithms. He writes:
After Sweeney released her findings, several explanations for her results
were proposed. Perhaps someone had deliberately programmed "arrest" results to appear with names associated with blacks? That would be intentional discrimination, and Instant Checkmate and Google both vehemently
denied it. On the other hand, let us suppose that (for whatever reasons)
web searchers tended to click on Instant Checkmate ads more often when
names associated with blacks had "arrest" associations, rather than more
neutral ones. In that case, the programmer behind the ad-matching engine
could say that all it is doing is optimizing for clicks-it is agnostic about
people's reasons for clicking. It presents itself as a cultural voting machine,
merely registering, rather than creating, perceptions (p. 39).
He notes that "without access to the underlying coding and data," it is difficult to evaluate why the ads exhibited racial bias (p. 39).
Economists have theorized how discrimination might arise even from
decisionmakers not themselves motivated by invidious prejudices. A halfcentury ago, economists began to ask how racism or sexism can persist in a
world of profit-maximizing employers. If employers are profit maximizers,
"non-discriminatory employers.... would drive out the others," who would
be paying unsustainable premiums to continue their discriminatory hiring
practices. 66 Edmund Phelps and Kenneth Arrow offered one explanation:
62.

Cynthia Dwork et al., Fairness Through Awareness, in

INNOVATIONS IN THEORETICAL

2012, at 214 (2012), http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2090236&preflay
out=flat [https://perma.cc/S6EB-HG3U].
COMPUTER SCIENCE

63. Latanya Sweeney, Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery, COMM. ACM, May 2013, at
44, http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2013/5/163753-discrimination-in-online-ad-delivery/
[https://perma.ccIN6NZ-H7R3].
64.

Id. at 50-52.

65.

Id. at 52.

66. Kenneth Arrow describes this in economic terms: "If the members of the two races,
after adjusting for observable differences in human capital and the like, received different
wages or were charged different prices in commodity or credit markets, an arbitrage possibility
would be created which would be wiped out by competition." Kenneth J. Arrow, What Has
Economics to Say About Racial Discrimination?,J. ECON. PERSP., Spring 1998, at 91, 94-95.

1038

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

statistical discrimination. 67 Because race or gender might be statistically associated with an unobservable trait-such as worker productivity or propensity to remain in the labor market-profit-maximizing employers might
discriminate on the basis of race or gender, using the observable characteristics as proxies for the unobservable traits. 68 In Arrow's model, this discrimination becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy, as individuals in discriminatedagainst groups decide not to invest in their education because they will not
be properly rewarded in the market. 69 Phelps and Arrow speak of observable
traits and unobservable skills, 70 but their statistical discrimination model
might well be adapted to observable traits and impermissible traits. It is often
possible to make educated predictions about unknown and often-impermissible traits from the known traits available in the data.
Proxies for prohibited categories might be found in relatively innocuous
activities such as web-browsing behavior. It is possible to predict race and
other attributes with reasonable accuracy based on what pages an individual
"likes" on Facebook. 71 According to one study using Facebook "likes,"
African Americans and Caucasian Americans were correctly classified in
95% of cases, and males and females were correctly classified in 93% of
cases ..... Christians and Muslims were correctly classified in 82% of
cases, and similar results were achieved for Democrats and Republicans
(85%). Sexual orientation was easier to distinguish among males (88%)
than females (75%).72
The worry is that algorithms will utilize proxies for impermissible information, reconstructing with reasonable accuracy that barred information
through analysis of available information.
Imagine a college admissions office turns over to an algorithm, whose
mandate is to select students who will perform well in the job market. If the
job market itself favors whites, 73 the algorithm may use available proxies for
whiteness-such as the applicant's home zip code or the high school one
attended-relying on the de facto segregation of housing and secondary education that has survived Brown v. Board of Education.7 4 Viral discrimination
67. Kenneth J. Arrow, The Theory of Discrimination, in DISCRIMINATION

AND LABOR

3 (Orley Ashenfelter & Albert Rees eds., 1973); Edmund S. Phelps, The Statistical
Theory of Racism and Sexism, 62 AM. ECON. REv. 659 (1972). Before Phelps and Arrow, others
had postulated taste-based discrimination, where an employer had a preference for discrimination, which economists had suggested could not be maintained in a perfectly competitive environment. See GARY BECKER, THE ECONOMICS OF DISCRIMINATION 84-85 (2d ed. 1971).
MARKETS

68.

See Arrow, supra note 66, at 3-4.

69. Id. at 26-27.
70. See generally Arrow, supra note 66; Phelps, supra note 67.
71. Michal Kosinski et al., Private Traits and Attributes Are Predictable from Digital
Records of Human Behavior, 110 PROC. NAT'L ACAD. OF Sci. 5802, 5802 (2013).
72.
73.

Id. at 5803.
Barnes et al., supra note 18, at 988-89.

74.

See, e.g., JOHN ICELAND ET AL., U.S. CENSUS BUREAU, RACIAL AND ETHNIC RESIDEN-

1980-2000 (2002), https://www.census.gov/prod/
2002pubs/censr-3.pdf [https://perma.cc/X5RK-TQ7H].
TIAL SEGREGATION IN THE UNITED STATES:

1039

The Racist Algorithm?

April 2017]

could hold a pernicious quality absent in discrimination by human decisionmakers-the ability to defend the algorithm as a supposedly objective
decisionmaker.
Thus, alongside this problem of intentional invidious discrimination,
automated algorithms offer a perhaps more ubiquitous risk: replicating realworld inequalities. Discrimination can thus be propagated virally through
real-world data. How should we address this problem? We now turn to this
question.
III.

ALGORITHMIC AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

The opposite of a black box society where "secret algorithms process[
inaccessible data" 75 is an "intelligible society." 76 Accordingly, Pasquale's prin77
cipal solution to the problem of black box discrimination is transparency.
Pasquale uses "black box" in the following sense: "[A] system whose workings are mysterious; we can observe its inputs and outputs, but we cannot
tell how one becomes the other" (p. 3). Pasquale's metaphor of the "black
box" suggests that the solution to algorithmic ills is to open algorithms up
for examination. If the problem of algorithmic discrimination is likely to lie
in manipulations, then indeed peering inside the black box seems the
answer.
But if the problem is likely to lie in the ways that algorithms might
replicate real-world discrimination through their statistical methodologies,
then I suggest that the solution lies elsewhere. Instead of transparency in the
design of the algorithm, what we need is a transparencyof inputs and outputs.
Pasquale himself recognizes that algorithmic ills often lie in the data, rather
than the algorithm itself, but the "black box metaphor" is easy to misread (p.
18). By focusing on inputs and outputs, we can more readily identify disparate impact. Bertrand and Mullainathan's experiment 78 serves as an exemplar of this approach. A key question from the algorithmic affirmative action
approach would be: Are African Americans or women (or another relevant
group) receiving statistically worse results, given their relevant characteristics? The focus on outcomes rather than how an algorithm operates seems
especially useful as algorithms become increasingly complicated, even able
79
to modify themselves.
75.

See p. 14.

76.

See p. 202.

77. Pasquale does not seek in this book to specify exactly what must be disclosed, by
whom, to whom, or when. On all these details, he hints at flexibility, writing on the last page
as his call to action: "[ilt is time for us as citizens to demand that important decisions about
our financial and communication infrastructures be made intelligible, soon, to independent
reviewers-and that, over the years and the decades to come, they be made part of a pubic
record available to us all." P. 218.
78.

See supra note 19 and accompanying text.

79.

Nir Ailon et al., Self-Improving Algorithms, 40 Soc'Y

MATICS J. ON COMPUTING

350 (2011).

FOR INDUS.

& APPLIED

MATHE-

1040

Michigan Law Review

[VoL 115:1023

Transparency of the algorithms themselves can prove a limited solution.
First, transparency invites manipulations by those who game those algorithms. 80 Google responds to those calling for algorithmic transparency by
noting that while its page-ranking algorithm is described in general detail in
public filings, "[i]f people who are trying to game search rankings knew
every single detail about how we rank sites, it would be easier for them to
'spam' our results with pages that are not relevant and are frustrating to
users-including porn and malware sites." 81 Moreover, Cynthia Dwork and
Deirdre Mulligan argue that "[e]xposing the datasets and algorithms of big
data analysis to scrutiny-transparency solutions-may improve individual
comprehension, but given the independent (sometimes intended) complexity of algorithms, it is unreasonable to expect transparency alone to root out
bias." 82 Second, requiring the publication of the algorithm itself may compromise trade secrets. 83 Third, individuals may know what the algorithm
does yet lack choice in whether to participate in it.84 Fourth, the algorithm
may be too complicated for many others to understand, or even if it is understandable, too demanding, timewise, to comprehend fully. 5 Fifth, because the discrimination may arise through the training or operational data
rather than the algorithm itself, revealing the facially neutral algorithm may
help defend that algorithm from accusations of discrimination. 86 Finally, in
the era of self-enhancing algorithms, the algorithm's human designers may
engineers may no
not fully understand their own creation: even Google
87
do.
algorithms
their
of
some
what
understand
longer
This is why affirmative action is the right model for fashioning a remedy
for algorithmic discrimination. 88 Here, I mean "affirmative action" in its
80. Joshua A. Kroll et al., Accountable Algorithms, 165 U. PA. L. REv. 633, 639 (2017)
("The process for deciding which tax returns to audit, or whom to pull aside for secondary
security screening at the airport, may need to be partly opaque to prevent tax cheats or terrorists from gaming the system." (manuscript at 6)).
Matt Cutts, Google, Transparency, and Our Not-So-Secret Formula, GOOGLE EUROPE
(Mar. 2, 2010), http://googlepolicyeurope.blogspot.com/2010/03/google-transparencyand-our-not-so.html [http://perma.cc/LBV8-QXHE].
82. Cynthia Dwork & Deirdre K. Mulligan, Response, It's Not Privacy, and It's Not Fair,
66 STAN. L. REv. ONLINE 35, 37 (2013), https://review.law.stanford.edu/wp-content/uploads/
sites/3/2016/08/DworkMullliganSLR.pdf [https://perma.cc/5KF6-24SL].
83. Kroll et al., supra note 80, at 658.
81.

BLOG

84.
85.

See Dwork & Mulligan, supra note 82, at 37-38.
See Pasquale, supra note 8.

86.

See discussion supra Part II.
Barry Schwartz, Google's Paul Haahr:We Don't Fully UnderstandRankBrain, SEARCH

87.

ENGINE ROUNDTABLE

(Mar. 8, 2016, 7:55 AM), https://www.seroundtable.com/google-dont-

understand-rankbrain-21744.html [https://perma.cc/H7JK-NM5Q] ("RankBrain is Google's
query interpretation that uses artificial intelligence.").
88. Cynthia Dwork and her colleagues suggest "fair affirmative action" as a goal of algorithmic decisionmaking, defining the phrase as obtaining "statistical parity (i.e., the
demographics of the set of individuals receiving any classification are the same as the
demographics of the underlying population), while treating similar individuals as similarly as
possible." Dwork et al., supra note 62, at 214.

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

1041

broadest sense, as a set of proactive practices that recognize deficiencies in
the equality of opportunity and act in a multiplicity of ways to seek to correct for those deficiencies. The Affirmative Action Review conducted during
the Clinton Administration defined affirmative action as "any effort taken to
expand opportunity for women or racial, ethnic and national origin minorities by using membership in those groups that have been subject to discrimination as a consideration." 89 Affirmative action does not focus on
identifying the how of discrimination, but on working to correct it, regardless of its source. For example, it does not ask if the hiring officer has biases
unknown even to himself or herself, or whether structural reasons limit the
number of applicants from a particular group. The EEOC's guidelines for
affirmative action issued in 1979 cited Congress's finding of the "'complex
and pervasive nature' of systemic discrimination against women and minorities" without worrying about identifying the sources of the discrimination
precisely. 90 The goal is not to point fingers to the source of the problem,
complex as it is likely to be, but to seek to rectify the problem.
The counterintuitive result of affirmative action is that the decisionmaker must take race and gender into account in order to ensure the
fairness of the result. This is what struck Chief Justice John Roberts as implausible: "The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on the basis of race."91 The obvious remedy to the problem of
manipulations of algorithms that produce racist or sexist outcomes would
seem to be to mandate race or gender neutrality. In reality, however, even
while neutrality is certainly better than hard-coded racism or sexism, racial
or sex neutrality would in fact perpetuate the problem of algorithmic replication of existing racism. Justice Sonia Sotomayor responded sharply to
Chief Justice Roberts' claim in a recent opinion: "The way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to speak openly and candidly on the subject of
race, and to apply the Constitution with eyes open to the unfortunate effects
of centuries of racial discrimination."92 In the past, opponents of affirmative
action have sought to prevent the government from collecting statistics on
race, which would make it more difficult to establish wrongful discrimination and also make affirmative action more difficult. For example, California's proposed Racial Privacy Initiative (more accurately a Racial Blindness
Initiative) would have foreclosed the collection of racial information by the
89.

GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS & CHRISTOPHER EDLEY, JR., AFFIRMATIVE ACTION RE-

ยง 1.1 n.1 (1995), https://clinton2.nara.gov/WH/EOP/OP/
html/aa/aa-index.html [https://perma.cc/374L-32BG]. See generally John Valery White, What is
Affirmative Action?, 78 TUL. L. REV. 2117 (2004).
90. Affirmative Action Appropriate Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as
Amended, 44 Fed. Reg. 4422 (Jan. 19, 1979) (to be codified at 29 C.F.R. pt. 1608) (quoting
H.R. Rep. No. 92-238, 92nd Cong., 2nd Sess. 8 (1972)).
91. Parents Involved in Cmty. Sch. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701, 748 (2007).
VIEW: REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT

92. Schuette v. Coal. to Defend Affirmative Action, Integration & Immigrant Rights &
Fight for Equal. By Any Means Necessary (BAMN), 134 S.Ct. 1623, 1676 (2014) (Sotomayor,
J., dissenting).

1042

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

government, resulting in adverse effects on minorities in the state. 93 As I
have written elsewhere,
[The] initiative [to deny government racial information collection] would
force racial indifference on state government by preventing it from gathering racial information-in employment, in education, and in law enforcement. Of course, government workers could secretly still make personal
assessments of race-based on appearance, speech, domicile, and name.
Rather, the measure would find its significance in denying the government
any systematic ability to engage in affirmative action. At the same time, it
would deny minorities the factual record that would facilitate claims for
police harassment and governmental redlining.94
Corporations may be reluctant to explicitly consider protected categories in
their decisionmaking for fear that this might be used to argue that they
intended, or at least abided, any discrimination that persists. But such efforts
to avoid and ameliorate discrimination should be recognized as exculpatory,
not incriminating.
What would algorithmic affirmative action consist of? It would begin by
recognizing the differential results possible even with ostensibly neutral algorithms. At times, this might mean different design choices, such as what
information the algorithm provides at what time. According to the Federal
Trade Commission, one company decided to exclude where a person lived
"from its hiring algorithm because of concerns about racial discrimination,
particularly since different neighborhoods can have different racial
9

compositions.."5

Consider the well-known problem that African Americans have faced in

96
hailing taxicabs, an obstacle that can severely restrict mobility. Uber de-

signed its platform so that its drivers do not see a photo of the passenger
until after the driver has accepted the fare. Moreover, Uber's platform does
not give the driver the passenger's destination again until the driver has accepted the fare, preventing the use of the redundant encoding of home address as a proxy for race. A driver may cancel a fare when he or she learns of
the passenger's race or destination, but every canceled trip is seen as a negative mark against the driver. The end result is that some African Americans
report that it is easier to obtain transportation using Uber than through
93. James Q. Wilson, Colorblind Versus Blindfolded, L.A. TIMES (July 21, 2003), http://
articles.latimes.com/2003/jul/31/opinion/oe-wilson31 [https://perma.cc/398J-CAYM].
94.

Anupam Chander, Essay, Minorities, Shareholder and Otherwise, 113 YALE L.J. 119,

173 (2003).
95. FED. TRADE COMM'N, BIG DATA: A TOOL FOR INCLUSION OR EXCLUSION, at v (2016),
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/big-data-tool-inclusion-or-exclusion-understanding- issues/ 160106big-data-rpt.pdf [https://perma.cc/C7MR-WW9S].
96. ABC news program Good Morning America demonstrated the difficulty that African
American attorney Christopher Darden, who was the prosecutor in the O.J. Simpson case,
faced when trying to hail a cab in the evening. Dan Harris & Gitika Ahuja, Race for a Cab:
When Hailing a Ride Isn't So Black and White, ABC NEWS (Apr. 1, 2009), http://abcnews.go
.com/GMA/race-cab-hailing-ride-black-white/story?id=7223511 [https://perma.cc/N2GT-2JX
R].

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

1043

hailing a taxi on the street.9 7 This is certainly no panacea to the problems of
racism such as those experienced by the driver. For example, Nancy Leong
has argued that racism will likely evince itself in the ratings system, leading
black drivers to be less well-rated than white drivers. 98
At times, a likely discriminatory result may make an algorithmic approach unwise. In response to the revelations of sexist results from its
autocomplete for "women should," Google simply directed its computers
not to perform autocomplete for those words (or for "men should"). 99 For a
time, searches for "n***** house" during Barack Obama's presidency would
report the White House as a top search result.100 Whether because of
Google's response to these reports, or because of changes in users' behavior,
that result no longer materializes.
An affirmative action approach recognizing viral discrimination would
require a focus on the data that algorithms use. Transparency in data, rather
than in the algorithms themselves, is consistent with some recent work in
computer science. Michael Feldman, Sorelle Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos
Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian seek to measure algorithmic
fairness without needing transparency in the design of the algorithm: "Instead of requiring access to the [algorithm], we propose making inferences
based on the data [the algorithm] uses." 10 1 This recalls Pasquale's suggestion
of transparency in the data that algorithms operate upon: "When a company
builds a dossier on you, you deserve a chance to review it and correct it," he
writes (p. 147). And Pasquale suggests that a company not attending to the
discriminatory results arising out of discriminatory data might be committing "algorithmic negligence" (p. 40).
Data about outputs would be crucial to identifying an algorithm's disparate impact. Richard Primus observes that disparate impact doctrine
97. Journalist Latoya Peterson writes that she, as an African American woman, turns to
Uber to find transportation because regular taxis ignore her. Latoya Peterson, Cab Drivers,
Uber, and the Costs of Racism, RAcIALICIOUS (Nov. 28, 2012), https://web.archive.org/web/
20160326193424/http://www.racialicious.com/2012/11/28/cab-drivers-uber-and-the-costs-ofracism/ [https://perma.cc/L24B-WXM4] ("[Tihe premium car service removes the racism factor when you need a ride."); see also Clinton Yates, Uber: When Cabs Whiz By, It's a Pick Me
Up, WASH. POST (Sept. 28, 2012), https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/therootdc/post
uber-when-cabs-whiz-by-its- a-pick-me-up/2012/09/28/06a4 1fOc-082f-11e2-858a-531 ldf86ab
04_blog.html?hpid=z4 [https://perma.cc/W29B-C43W].
98. Uber, Privacy, and Discrimination, NANCY LEONG (Apr. 20, 2014), http://www
.nancyleong.com/race-2/uber-privacy-discrimination/
[https://perma.cc/9FDB-WSKY]; see
also Benjamin Sachs, Uber: A Platform for Discrimination,ON LABOR (Oct. 22, 2015), https://
onlabor.org/2015/10/22/uber-a-platform-for-discrimination/ [https://perma.cc/DT2S-9AP8].
99. See David Auerbach, Filling the Void, SLATE (Nov. 19, 2013, 11:58 AM), http://www
.slate.com/articles/technology/bitwise/2013/1 l/google autocomplete-the resultsaren-t-al
ways what.you-think they-are.html [https://perma.cc/3WAU-S4TG].
100. Samuel Gibbs, Google Says Sorry Over Racist Google Maps White House Search Results,
GUARDIAN (May 20, 2015, 5:52 AM), http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/20/
google-apologises-racist-google-maps-white-house-search-result [https://perma.cc/DBB9-5TE

3].
101.

MICHAEL FELDMAN ET AL., CERTIFYING AND REMOVING DISPARATE IMPACT 1

(emphasis omitted), https://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.3756.pdf [https://perma.cc/78LS-545L].

(2015)

1044

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

counters historical disadvantage: "By forcing employers to notice racial patterns and think about possible ways to change them, disparate impact doctrine helps diminish the power of historical hierarchies."' 1 2 In the traditional
application of disparate impact doctrine, employers were free to institute
affirmative action programs based on statistical evidence that the percentage
of minorities or women fell short of their percentage in the relevant pool. 103
Most recently, the Supreme Court has approved the use of statistics demon4
strating disparate impact to support a claim for unfair housing.10
An affirmative action approach would seek to ensure that the data used
to train an algorithm are evaluated for being embedded with viral discrimination. It would require attention to discrimination in both the validation
set and the unseen test set of data.0 5 The Obama Administration offered a
similar approach in its recent report on big data: "To avoid exacerbating
biases by encoding them into technological systems, we need to develop a
principle of 'equal opportunity by design'-designing data systems that promote fairness and safeguard against discrimination from the first step of the
engineering process and continuing throughout their lifespan." 1 6 Such an
approach would require companies to anticipate how their algorithms are
likely to operate in the real world and to review those operations for discriminatory results.
At times, it may be appropriate to share details of inputs and outputs
with a third party who could review the fairness of the decisionmaker's algorithm. Computer scientists seeking algorithmic fairness have sometimes
postulated both a decisionmaker, who uses the operational algorithm, and
an independent certifier, who reviews the fairness of the decisionmaker's
102. Richard A. Primus, Equal Protection and DisparateImpact: Round Three, 117 HARV.
L. REV. 493, 535 (2003).
103.

As the Supreme Court announced in 1987:

[C]onsideration of the sex of applicants for Skilled Craft jobs [may be] justified by the
existence of a "manifest imbalance" that reflected underrepresentation of women in "traditionally segregated job categories." In determining whether an imbalance exists that
would justify taking sex or race into account, a comparison of the percentage of minorities or women in the employer's work force with the percentage in the area labor market
or general population is appropriate in analyzing jobs that require no special expertise .....Where a job requires special training, however, the comparison should be with
those in the labor force who possess the relevant qualifications.
Johnson v. Transp. Agency, 480 U.S. 616, 631-32 (1987) (citations omitted).
104. See Tex. Dep't of Hous. & Cmty. Affairs v. Inclusive Cmtys. Project, Inc., 135 S.Ct.
2507, 2513 (2015).
105.

TREVOR HASTIE ET AL., THE ELEMENTS OF STATISTICAL LEARNING: DATA MINING,

222 (2d ed. 2009) ("If we are in a data-rich situation, the best
approach for [model selection and model assessment] is to randomly divide the dataset into
three parts: a training set, a validation set, and a test set. The training set is used to fit the
models; the validation set is used to estimate prediction error for model selection; the test set
is used for assessment of the generalization error of the final chosen model.").
INFERENCE, AND PR DICTION

A REPORT ON ALGORITHMIC SYSTEMS,
5-6 (2016), https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/
microsites/ostp/2016_0504_datadiscrimination.pdf [https://perma.cc/9XQT-9VYQ].
106.

EXEC.

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG DATA:

OPPORTUNITY, AND CIVIL RIGHTS

April 2017]

The Racist Algorithm?

algorithm.1 0 7 In a recent blog post, Pasquale suggests that "[e]ven if algorithms at the heart of these processes 'transcend all understanding,' we can
inspect the inputs (data) that go into them, restrict the contexts in which
they are used, and demand outputs that avoid disparate impacts."18
CONCLUSION

When we appraise emerging technologies, we must be careful not to
romanticize a pretechnological past. New technologies must be examined
both in comparison to their less-technological alternatives and in the context
of the world that we now inhabit. The black boxes of the past may have been
analog, but they were every bit as obscure as the digital black boxes of today.
They took place in committees, in conversations among executives, in
backroom deals among power brokers, or most often, in the minds of men.
In Lin-Manuel Miranda's musical celebrating the life of Alexander Hamilton, his rival Aaron Burr longs to "be in the room where it happens," where
"the sausage gets made." 10 9 The ultimate black box, of course, is the brain
which, even with the latest techniques, remains remarkably opaque.
The turn to algorithmic decisionmaking does not break us free from
prejudices. This is one of Pasquale's most important contributions: the recognition that automated systems are not free of bias simply because they are
executed by logical machines. Consider yet another recent example:
"Microsoft Created a Twitter Bot to Learn From Users. It Quickly Became a
Racist Jerk."" 0 Avoiding viral discrimination will require the application of
affirmative action principles. Pasquale forces us to confront the ethics of the
coming age of automated algorithms.11 As Pasquale crucially observes,
"[O]nly humans can perform the critical function of making sure that, as
our social relations become ever more automated, domination and discrimination aren't built invisibly into their code" (p. 213).

107. Feldman et al., supra note 101, at 6 ("It is Bob's job to verify that on the data D,
Alice's algorithm A is not liable for a claim of disparate impact.").
108. Pasquale, supra note 8.
109. Lin-Manuel Miranda, The Room Where It Happens, in Lin-Manuel Miranda & Jeremy
McCarter, HAMILTON: THE REVOLUTION 186, 187 (2016).
110. Daniel Victor, Microsoft Created a Twitter Bot to Learn from Users. It Quickly Became
a Racist Jerk., N.Y. TIMEs (Mar. 24, 2016), http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/technology/
microsoft-created-a-twitter-bot-to-learn-from-users-it-quickly-became-a-racist-jerk.htm
(on
file with Michigan Law Review).
111. See Mustafa Suleyman, Announcing the Partnershipon AI to Benefit People & Society,
DEEPMIND (Sept. 28, 2016), https://deepmind.com/blog/announcing-partnership-ai-benefitpeople-society/ [https://perma.cc/GFY7-C3EC]; Industry Leaders Establish Partnershipon AI
Best Practices, IBM (Sept. 28, 2016), http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/enpressrelease/50668
.wss [https://perma.cc/SV65-U8TV].

1046

Michigan Law Review

[Vol. 115:1023

