IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2003

893

A New Hybrid Multibias
Analytical/Decomposition-Based FET
Parameter Extraction Algorithm
With Intelligent Bias Point Selection
Cornell van Niekerk, Member, IEEE, Johan A. du Preez, Member, IEEE, and
Dominique M. M.-P. Schreurs, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A new hybrid multibias analytical/decomposition-based parameter extraction procedure for GaAs FETs is
described. The analytical calculations are integrated into an
existing decomposition-based optimizer in a complementary
approach, further increasing the robustness of the existing algorithm. It is illustrated that, in order to increase the reliability with
which the full 15-element small-signal model can be extracted,
it is necessary to exploit the underlaying characteristics of the
system and the measured data used. This is achieved through the
use of cold -parameter data, along with simple modifications to
the extraction algorithm, and a new intelligent selection algorithm
for the active bias points used in the multi-bias extraction. The
selection algorithm employs a simple geometric abstraction for
the -parameter data that allows it to select bias points that
maximize the information available to the extraction procedure.
The new selection algorithm shows for the first time what the
influence of the bias points is on the performance of a multibias
extraction procedure. Experimental results proving the robustness
and accuracy of the described procedures are presented.
Index Terms—Centroids, FET, modeling, multibias parameter
extraction, -parameters, selection algorithms, small-signal.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HE ability to generate measurement-based GaAs FET
device models that are accurate enough to allow first-time
design success for a variety of systems has long been a major
goal of device modeling orientated computer-aided design
(CAD) algorithms. The extraction of the small-signal model
shown in Fig. 1 plays a crucial role in the construction of a
large number of the nonlinear models that have been created
to satisfy this goal.
The basic approach is to extract the small-signal model at
a variety of different bias points and then use the variation
of the intrinsic elements with bias to construct the nonlinear
model. Such an experimental modeling approach requires that
a large number of -parameter measurements be processed,
creating the need for extraction algorithms that can robustly
Manuscript received March 26, 2002.
C. van Niekerk and J. A. du Preez are with the Department of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch 7602, South
Africa.
D. M. M.-P. Schreurs is with the ESAT-TELEMIC, Department of Electronic
Engineering, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMTT.2003.808631

Fig. 1. 15-element small-signal model of a GaAs FET.

perform large extractions without requiring user intervention or
supervision. However, this requirement is made difficult by the
ill-conditioned nature of the small-signal extraction problem.
This causes both direct [1] and optimizer-based extraction
procedures that process the data measured at different bias
points separately to have difficulty in providing consistent
solutions for all the elements in the small-signal model [2].
Several optimizer driven multibias extraction procedures
[3]–[5] that combine data measured at different bias points into
one unified problem have been proposed. These methods all
assume that the extrinsic elements of the model in Fig. 1 are
bias-independent. By combining data from different sources in
the extraction algorithm, more information becomes available
for determining a more unique solution.
In [3] a multibias parameter extraction algorithm that exploits
a decomposition-based optimization algorithm was presented.
The procedure uses multiple sets of -parameters measured at
plane
bias points in the active region of the device’s
and has been successfully applied to the modeling of both
GaAs high electron-mobility transistor (HEMT) and MESFET
devices. Active bias points at which the device is behaving
as a nonreciprocal two-port provide the maximum amount of
measured information per bias point. The extraction algorithm
is built around an adaptive decomposition-based optimizer. This
optimization procedure is independent of initial values and well
suited to the ill-conditioned nature of the extraction problem.
The decomposition approach can also efficiently handle large
dimensional problems and is not as susceptible to the curse of
dimensionality, as in more traditional optimization approaches.

0018-9480/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE

894

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2003

In [3] a 13-element small-signal model which neglects the
and
was extracted. The inclusion of the pareffect of
asitic capacitors when dealing with on-wafer measured devices
greatly increases the complexity of the problem. In practice, an
extraction algorithm has to deal with several phenomena that
make it difficult to achieve consistent results when extracting the
full 15-element model shown in Fig. 1. One of the problems enand
do not always
countered is that the parasitic resistors
adhere to the assumption of bias independence for the extrinsic
elements. It has been found from experience that the value of
can appear to have a large bias dependence and assume values
and a variation with bias that does not correspond to the physical
reality. This in turn can make the determination of the other less
dominant elements difficult. Another difficulty is the small size
, and
of on-wafer measured
of the parasitic inductors
devices. The small series impedance resulting from the paraand
from the
sitic inductors and resistors that separate
larger intrinsic capacitors makes it difficult to accurately extract
the individual capacitor values. In many instances, device modelers are forced to absorb the effect of these two elements into
the intrinsic capacitors by neglecting them from the small-signal
can be especially difficult to determine, even for
model.
direct extraction algorithms that rely heavily on model simplican also be seen
fications. The difficulty in determining
, which exhibits
in the variation of the extracted values of
[6], [7]. Since most of the model
strong interactions with
elements have complex interactions with each other, it should
be noted that these potential problems should not be viewed in
isolation from each other. Also, not all devices will exhibit all
of the above-mentioned modeling difficulties.
This paper presents three extensions to the decompositionbased multibias extraction algorithm discussed in [3] which are
able to overcome the discussed extraction difficulties.
In Section II, a new hybrid optimizer/analytical procedure
aimed at improving the robustness and speed of the original procedure is presented. Analytical equations for the calculation of
the intrinsic elements are integrated into the existing extraction
procedure. Unlike other published algorithms [4], [5], [8], the
analytical calculations do not replace any section of the optimizer, but are used in a complementary approach.
Section III will show how simple modifications to [3], along
with the use of cold -parameter data, can be used to help over, and
come the discussed difficulties in determining
.
The one aspect of multibias parameter extraction algorithms
that has not been dealt with before is the influence of the bias
points used in the extraction on the accuracy and the size of
the network that can be extracted. In Section IV, an intelligent
bias point selection algorithm is discussed that maximizes the
information available to the extraction procedure. The aim of
the selection algorithm is to find a relatively small number of
bias points from which a consistent model representation can
be extracted. Once accurate values for the extrinsic elements
are known, they can be de-embedded from the complete set
of multibias -parameters and a nonlinear model can be constructed as was done in [9]. The paper is concluded with a presentation and discussion of experimental results illustrating the

accuracy and robustness of the enhanced multibias extraction
algorithm.
The goal of the work described here is to develop a modeling
procedure that is capable of extracting all the elements of a
small-signal model for the construction of bias-dependent smallsignal models and nonlinear models of commercial devices,
as well as devices under development, using only measured
data. This means that no process-related information, such as
electromagnetic simulations of the device layout, is allowed as
part of the modeling procedure. The reason for this restriction is
due to the fact that process-related information is rarely available
to users of commercial devices. The requirement of accurately
extracting all of the small-signal model elements also places
a limit on the complexity of the equivalent circuit models that
are used in the modeling procedure. For the results presented
in the subsequent sections, the widely published 15-element
model topology in Fig. 1 is used.

II. HYBRID ANALYTICAL/DECOMPOSITION-BASED OPTIMIZER
Experience has shown that certain extraction problems are
more difficult to solve reliably than others, regardless of the fact
that the same type of device with similar dimensions is being
modeled. Systematic measurement errors and the fact that the
small-signal model is an imperfect approximation of the real
device creates a variety of extraction difficulties. This ranges
from extraction problems that differ in their sensitivity to the
initial optimization values to model elements that consistently
converge to nonphysical values. When dealing with measured
data, the modeling algorithm therefore needs to be as robust as
possible.
Several methods that employ analytical equations as part of
an optimization-based extraction approach have been published
[4], [5], [8]. In these formulations, the extrinsic elements are
optimized, while the intrinsic elements are calculated as a function of the extrinsic elements using analytical equations. The
primary advantage of this approach is that it limits the dimensions of the optimization problem to be solved. The formulation
in [4] is of special relevance since the procedure is expanded to
multibias problems and the analytical equations used are more
robust than the more traditional equations found in [10].
The danger of using analytical equations to calculate the intrinsic elements is that the equations may fail in certain instances
due to the measured data used and the ill-conditioned nature of
the problem. The new hybrid procedure proposed here therefore
always uses both optimization and analytical calculations to determine the intrinsic parameters. The two possible solutions for
the intrinsic elements are then compared on an element-by-element basis and in each instance the model element providing
the best solution is retained.
The following steps describe the operation of the hybrid
algorithm.
1) Load the measured data and the optimization initial values
and perform the required sensitivity calculations for the
decomposition-based optimizer as outlined in [2], [3].
2) Perform one optimization cycle of the subfunctions of the
decomposition optimizer as described in [3].

VAN NIEKERK et al.: FET PARAMETER EXTRACTION ALGORITHM WITH INTELLIGENT BIAS POINT SELECTION

3) Perform the hybrid calculations.
a) De-embed the current values of the extrinsic elements from the measured data.
b) Calculate an alternative set of intrinsic elements for
each bias point in the extraction using the analytical
equations in [4].
c) Compare each of the optimization-derived intrinsic elements with its corresponding calculated
value and choose the element value that provides the
lowest modeling error in the elements’ associated
optimization subfunction. These subfunctions are the
same error functions that are used by the decomposition-based optimizer when determining the model
element values in step 2).
4) Check if the search termination criteria are satisfied.
5) If no, then go to 2)
6) If yes, then stop.
The above description illustrates how the analytical step is incorporated into the existing optimizer. If step 3) is disabled,
the algorithm reverts to the normal decomposition-based optimizer. By using the suboptimization error functions in step 3c),
it becomes possible to compare the two solutions on an element-by-element basis. This would not be possible if a global
error representing the modeling accuracy of all four -parameters of a corresponding bias point was used. The global error
would be mostly influenced by the dominant model parameters,
creating the situation where possible good solutions for the less
dominant elements are discarded.
In addition to making the extraction more robust, the hybrid
procedure shown above also increases the speed of convergence,
especially during the first few iterations when the overall modeling error is large.
III. DATA-DRIVEN EXTENSIONS TO THE MULTIBIAS
EXTRACTION ALGORITHM
Much attention has been paid in the literature to the difficul.
ties involved in extracting the parasitic gate resistance
is one of the least dominant elements in the model and is highly
correlated with the intrinsic channel resistance . The ability
to separate the values of these two elements has been one of the
motivations behind the development of multibias extraction algorithms.
However, less attention has been paid to the extraction of the
. Experience has shown
to be
parasitic drain resistance
the element that least conforms to the assumption of bias independence for the extrinsic elements when extracted from hot
-parameters. For a variety of HEMTs that have been tested, it
can assume either very large or very small
was found that
can tend toward
nonphysical values, while for MESFETs
negative values. In the case of MESFETs, the behavior of
could possibly be linked to high field effects between the gate
and drain terminals [11], but for HEMTs no satisfactory phys, which has very little inical explanation is known. Unlike
is
fluence on the overall extraction accuracy, the value of
more critical for the successful determination of the other nondominant elements in the multibias extraction.

895

Fig. 2. Simplified representation of the output impedance of a GaAs FET.

In [12], an extraction procedure for determining
and
using cold bias points with the gate held at a suitably large forward bias was used. Fig. 2 and the equation

(1)
show a simplified representation of the output impedance of a
is increased,
decreases, resulting in
GaAs FET. When
the real part of the FET output impedance being dominated by
and . It is this behavior that is exploited in [12]. A careful
asstudy of (1) shows that a similar result is obtained when
is equal
sumes very large values, as would be the case when
to or less than the pinch-off voltage . Equation (1) also shows
and
on the output impedance can
that the dominance of
be further enhanced by using measured data from the upper
measurement frequencies. It should be noted that the effect of
is ignored in Fig. 2 and
the parasitic drain capacitance
(1). Unlike direct extraction algorithms, optimizer-based procedures do not need to achieve a near exact separation between the
model elements. For a successful extraction, it is only required
to find the conditions for which the influence of an element will
be more dominant.
A further advantage of using data from cold bias points with
is that the intrinsic model reduces to the three intrinsic
, and
. The bias points therefore
capacitor values
add a minimum of extra parameters to the multibias extraction
problem, while providing valuable additional information for
determining the solution.
The extraction algorithm in [3] is extended by allowing the
user to lock a small-signal model element to a specified list of
bias points. Only this subset of the data will be used for the determination of the particular model element. The user also has
the possibility to specify the frequency range of the measured
data that is to be used in the determination of an element. To determine , the user thus specifies a number of cold bias points
along with the normally used nonreciprocal
with
is locked to the cold bias points
data from active bias points.
and no other data is used in the determination of the element.
, only measurements
To further aid in the determination of
made at frequencies above 15 GHz are used.
The second problem experienced in the extraction of the
model in Fig. 1 is the separation of the parasitic capacitors

896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2003

and
from the intrinsic capacitors. The parasitic capacitors
are separated from the intrinsic capacitors by small series
impedances and their values are small when compared to those
of the intrinsic capacitors at most bias points. Their values
are therefore easily absorbed into the values of the intrinsic
capacitors due to the inability of the extraction algorithm to
clearly distinguish their effect from the other model elements.
and
, the same extensions as
In order to determine
can be employed. The parasitic
were used for determining
capacitors are locked to the cold -parameter data with
since the intrinsic capacitors generally assume their smallest
values in this bias range. The extrinsic capacitors are therefore
not as overshadowed as before by the size of the intrinsic capacitors. To further decrease any interaction between the different
and
are only determined from data
extrinsic elements,
measured at frequencies below 10 GHz, while the extrinsic inductors and resistors are determined from data measured at frequencies above 15 GHz.
IV. MEASUREMENT-BASED ACTIVE BIAS POINT
SELECTION ALGORITHM
The previous section illustrates how cold measurements,
along with suitable modifications to the extraction algorithm,
can be used to enhance the ability to determine extrinsic
elements that are otherwise difficult to extract. The majority of
the measured data is, however, still obtained from active bias
points where the device is acting as a nonreciprocal two-port.
For the extractions presented in [3], the active bias points were
selected by hand. A region denoted by a square is picked by the
plane. Bias
user in the saturated region of the device
points at the corners and the center of this square are chosen.
Should more bias points be required, they are picked from
within the square so as to provide a uniform distribution.
This procedure is in essence driven by the dc curves of the
device since the selection tries to uniformly cover the saturated
region of the bias plane. The characteristics of the -parameter
data used in the extraction are therefore not considered in the
selection of the bias points. The algorithm described in this section overcomes this deficiency by evaluating the -parameters
when choosing suitable bias points.
The algorithm can be divided into two distinct sections. The
–
first section of the algorithm selects a region of the
plane in which it is expected that the small-signal model used
will be able to accurately approximate the corresponding -parameter data and the intrinsic elements of the model have well
defined values. This subset of the complete multibias data set
will in subsequent sections be referred to as the region of reproducibility. The second part of the algorithm chooses a subset
of bias points from this region so that the -parameters at the
different bias points differ as much as possible from each other.
The algorithm therefore tries to maximize the diversity of the
measured data that is to be used in the extraction. The driving
force behind this selection criterion is the following.
By maximizing the diversity in the measured data used
in the extraction, more emphasis is placed on the elements
which are common to the -parameters from different bias
points, namely the effect of the bias-independent extrinsic

Fig. 3. Scatter plot of the centroids of the S S -parameters of a pHEMT
device. Every  marker represents a centroid C of an S S -parameter curve
at a different bias point. Changes in the position, orientation, and length of the
S curves due to changes in the bias point of the device is reflected in the
change of the C centroid’s position. The centroids marked with 5 markers
represent bias points that were selected with the first algorithm described in
Section IV-B. This algorithm performs an initial selection of centroids that are
as widely distributed from each other as possible. In the legend this is referred
to as the Initial Diversity Selection. Centroids marked with markers represent
changes made in the initial selection (5 markers) by the second algorithm
described in Section IV-B, which attempts to refine the initial selection by
improving the distribution of the selected points. Instances where the 5 and
markers overlap indicate centroids whose selection were not altered by the
refinement procedure.

elements. This aids in the consistent determination of their
values, which in turn improves the accuracy with which all
the other elements can be determined.
Each bias point is represented by four different -parameters,
of which each can be viewed as a curve in a complex plane.
Each of these curves can change in position, orientation, and
length as the bias voltages of the device are changed. In order to
implement the above-mentioned algorithms, a simple geometric
description of each -parameter curve is needed that will hide
the complexity of each curve, yet make it possible to detect
changes in the curve due to changes in the device bias point.
The geometric description should not be sensitive to noise in the
measured data and be simple to calculate. One such geometric
description is the centroid of a curve. The centroid is the mean
of the points in the complex plane that make up the -parameter
curve. Each -parameter is now represented by one complex
number and any changes in the length, orientation, or position
of the curve is reflected by a change of the centroid’s position.
In theory, there is an infinite number of curves with different
orientations and lengths which will all have the same centroid.
However, for the situation considered here, this is unlikely to
occur and it is therefore not a practical concern. Fig. 3 illustrates
-parameter of
the concept by showing the centroids of the
a pseudomorphic high electron-mobility transistor (pHEMT)
device. Every marker in Fig. 3 represents a centroid of an
-parameter curve at a different bias point.
A. Selecting the Region of Reproducibility From the
–
Plane
As stated before, the region of reproducibility is defined as
–
bias plane where it is expected that
an area of the

VAN NIEKERK et al.: FET PARAMETER EXTRACTION ALGORITHM WITH INTELLIGENT BIAS POINT SELECTION

the small-signal model used will be able to accurately approximate the measured -parameters. In this region of the bias
plane, it is also expected that the intrinsic model elements will
have well-defined values, which implies that they can be extracted with acceptable accuracy. It is unreasonable to expect
that the equivalent circuit small-signal model can provide the
same quality of data approximation across the whole range of
measured bias points. This observation is substantiated by a
range of related experimental evidence [13], [14]. The multibias extraction procedure searches for a solution that simultaneously minimizes the least squares modeling error for a wide
range of bias points by using a relatively small number of bias
points from the total selection of available data. This solution
can then be expanded to the rest of the data by deembedding the
extrinsic elements and using analytical equations to determine
the values of the intrinsic elements. It is therefore crucial that
potential bias points that will negatively impact on the initial
multibias extraction be excluded from the selection.
The selection criteria for the region of reproducibility are the
following.
• The device must be suitably nonreciprocal at each of the
bias points. This ensures that every -parameter data set
used in the multibias extraction provides the maximum
amount of additional information for the extraction algorithm. In order to determine if a device is suitably nonreciprocal, a reciprocity factor is calculated using the
and
. is defined as
centroids for
(2)
where
reciprocity factor at a specific bias point;
centroid of
at the corresponding bias point;
centroid of
at the corresponding bias point.
The reciprocity factor is the magnitude of the vector difference between the two complex centroid points and will
become zero as the device becomes reciprocal at
or when
decreases to the point where the device enters
its cut-off region. The first step in the algorithm is to determine the bias point at which has its maximum value.
are
All bias points for which is less than 20% of
that will
discarded. This limits the minimum value of
be used to define the safe region.
–
plane is excluded from
• The linear region of the
the allowed selection area. This region is characterized by
element values, making the determination of the
low
data for these bias
intrinsic elements difficult. The
points also show large inductive impedances, leading to
and . It
the overestimation of the parasitic inductors
that is used to isolate bias
is this inductive behavior of
–
points in or very close to the linear region of the
plane. All bias points for which the
curve has any
impedance points in the inductive region of the Smith chart
are excluded from the safe selection region. This selection
values of the
criterion places a limit on the minimum
safe region.
is larger than
is ex• Bias points for which
is determined from
cluded from the safe region.

897

Fig. 4. 3-D representation of I
as a function of V
and V . The bias
points shown with a marker are the result of the region of reproducibility
selection procedure.

the bias point for which
is a maximum. The intrinsic
in seFET model in Fig. 1 does not contain a resistor
. A study of the measured intrinsic
of a
ries with
number of HEMT devices indicates that the influence of
becomes more pronounced for high
voltages and
in the linear region. These observations also hold for alternative intrinsic FET models [15] since the assumptions
on which they are based are not strictly valid at high
voltages.
is therefore taken as a convenient and
conservative limit to exclude these areas.
It is important to note that the described linear region idenis only directly
tification step employing the phase of
applicable to on-wafer and chip devices, since for packaged
transistors the reactive influence of the packaging causes adand
of the device. Further
ditional phase shifts in the
of
more, if measured to a high enough frequency, the
any device will eventually become inductive. Since the gain
of the device decreases with frequency, this can be guarded
.
against in the identification algorithm by monitoring
Of the three selection criteria, the last is the least critical. Depending on the range of bias points over which the device was
characterized, it can either be ignored or replaced with a selection criterion that excludes bias points for which the power disexceeds a user-specified limit. Fig. 4 shows
sipation
as a function of
a three-dimensional (3-D) representation of
and
for a pHEMT device. The selected bias points are
indicated using solid circles. This subset of the measured data
is now to be used in the diversity-driven selection algorithm.
B. Diversity-Driven Bias Point Selection Algorithm
The diversity driven selection procedure selects a subset of
bias points from the region of reproducibility so that the centroids of the different -parameters are as far from each other as
possible. The selection procedure is applied to each of the four
-parameters separately to ensure that the diversity requirement
is satisfied for all the data to be used in the multibias extraction.
The results of the four separate selections are then combined
to provide a list of distinct bias points for use in the multibias
extraction.

898

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2003

The following sequence of steps describes the initial selection
algorithm.
1) Initialize the algorithm.
a) Get the user specified number of points to be se.
lected
b) Normalize the centroid data by removing the mean
component from the data and scaling each axis of the
two-dimensional (2-D) data set to range from 1 to 1.
This set of normalized data is represented by .
c) Select the centroid point furthest from the mean of
the normalized data set . Point represents both the
coordinates of the centroid point and the bias voltages
and
associated with the centroid.
represents the th point in
d)
which is used to store the diversity
the collection
selected bias points.
2) Evaluate the positions of the data points relative to each
other.
a) Calculate the distance from each point in to each
of the selected points in .
b) Store the minimum calculated distance for each
centroid point in .
3) Select the centroid point corresponding with the maximum distance stored in .
. This represents the next point in the
4)
diversity selection.
?
5) Is
6) If not, then go to step 2).
7) If yes, then stop.
The normalization of the centroid data as described in step 1b)
of the selection algorithm is used to obtain a data set in which the
real and imaginary components of the calculated centroids carry
equal weight. It should be noted that the normalization procedure used will affect the operation of the selection procedure due
to the influence that it has on the distribution of the centroids.
Given the fact that there is currently no theoretical basis available for choosing an optimum normalization, the procedure in
step 1b) was considered to be the safest alternative.
centroid points
The scatter plot in Fig. 3 containing the
also shows four points selected with the diversity-driven selection algorithm, indicated with markers. The bias points selected with the above-described algorithm do not represent the
optimum selection of bias points, but they do provide a selection
that is close to a local minimum for the problem statement. The
first selection can be refined by using a similar algorithm on the
already selected points. The refinement step is described by the
following sequence of operations.
1) Initialize the algorithm.
and the total
a) Get the selection of bias points
from which the selection was
number of points
made.
.
b) Set the counter

2) Check if point
should be adjusted to achieve better
diversity
a) Calculate the distance from every point in to each
, where
.
selected point
b) Store the minimum calculated distance for each
point in in .
with the bias point corresponding to
c) Replace
the maximum distance stored in .
.
3)
the number of points in ?
4) Does
5) If no, then go to step 2)
change?
6) Did the content of selection
7) If yes, then go to step 1b)
8) If no, then stop
The refinement algorithm is very similar to the initial selection procedure, but does not try to add more points to . It
only makes adjustments to the positions of the known points to
achieve a selection that provides a local optimum to the distribution problem. In Fig. 3, the result of the refinement step is
shown with markers. The initial selection used in the refinement are the points indicated with the markers.
The application of the selection and refinement algorithms described above to each of the four sets of centroids
, and
leads to four separate groups that
now have to be combined into one unified group. The groups
may overlap because the same bias point may satisfy the
diversity selection criteria of more than one -parameter. This
problem is solved by removing any duplicate bias points from
the selection. A second situation is that different selection
groups may have bias points which are distinct, but whose
centroid points differ by very little. These bias points can
therefore be represented by one bias point. This decreases the
number of points in the selection without seriously decreasing
the diversity of the -parameter data.
While the removal of bias points that have been duplicated
by the selection procedure is a trivial matter, the trimming of
bias points that provide nearly the same information is less so.
–
plane
When the selected bias points are plotted on the
of the device (see Fig. 5), one might be tempted to remove selected points that are directly adjacent to each other. This might
be in error since it does not take the -parameter characteristics
of the device into account. The following trimming procedure
was devised to remove a required number of points from a selection so as to provide the least disturbance to the diversity of
the -parameter data.
1) Initialize algorithm by getting the user specified number
of data points to be trimmed from the selection.
, and
into
2) Combine the selections
one selection .
3) Remove any duplicate points in .
.
4)
with each point in
that does not
5) Substitute
come from the same original subselection problem
, or
) as
, and calculate the
(
distance of the shift in the centroid coordinates caused
by each substitution.

VAN NIEKERK et al.: FET PARAMETER EXTRACTION ALGORITHM WITH INTELLIGENT BIAS POINT SELECTION

COMPARISON

Fig. 5. I –V curves of a GaAs pHEMT with the bias points selected by
various procedures. The bias points indicated by markers were selected by
hand, while the points indicated with
markers were determined with the
diversity driven selection procedures. Two sets of bias points as identified by
the trimming algorithm are also marked. In each case, these two bias points can
be represented by one bias point without seriously decreasing the diversity of
the S -parameter data.

1

6) Store the bias point which causes the minimum shift in
in
. This is the associated
the centroid of point
.
bias point to
.
7)
the total number of points in , then go to step
8) if
5).
which are closest to
9) Remove the bias points from
their associated bias points in .
10) Stop.
In Fig. 5, the two sets of two points which are the closest to each
other in terms of their associated -parameter data are shown in
dashed lines. Note that for the second selection the bias points
are not immediately adjacent to each other. In fact, the one remaining instance in which bias points are adjacent to each other
provides relatively distinct -parameter data, highlighting the
danger of making decisions purely on the I –V characteristics of the device.
V. EXTRACTION RESULTS
The effect of the algorithm extensions is illustrated by performing robustness tests on a lattice matched GaAs pHEMT device with a gate length of 0.2 m and a gate width of 100 m
[16]. Certain examples of this device have been found difficult
to model when using the conventional multibias decompositionbased optimizer [3]. The robustness test consists of repeating
a particular extraction 20 times while using randomly chosen
optimization starting values. The extraction starting values are
chosen over a large range using a uniform distribution.
Table I represents a summary of the extrinsic elements obtained with and without the hybrid search options described in
Section II. The table provides the range for each element in
which the optimization starting values were chosen, as well as
the best value, the mean, and the variation of the extracted extrinsic element values. The best value is defined as the parameter corresponding to the extraction with the lowest modeling
error, while the variation is defined as the difference between

OF THE

TABLE I
EXTRACTION IN [3] WITH
SEARCH ALGORITHM

899

THE

NEW HYBRID

TABLE II
COMPARISON OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE ACTIVE BIAS POINT SELECTION
METHOD ON THE HYBRID SEARCH WITH COLD BIAS POINT DRIVEN
EXTENSIONS

the maximum and minimum extracted element value, thus indicating the range of the solutions in absolute terms. Both multibias extraction experiments used 13 bias points selected using
the conventional bias point selection procedure. Fig. 5 contains a
plot of the I –V curves of the device. The active bias points
used in the extraction are indicated using square markers. In
all the experiments shown here, the measured -parameter data
ranged from 1 to 45 GHz.
Table II provides comparative test results showing the effect
of combining cold -parameter data with the hybrid search as
well as the effect of using active bias points selected with the diversity maximizing algorithm described in Section IV. Both experiments in Table II used the same cold -parameter data (five
and the associated extensions disbias points) with
cussed in Section III. In both cases, the same number of active
bias points, namely 13, were used. Fig. 5 shows the distribution
of the active bias points selected with the diversity driven selection procedure.
Table I illustrates that it is not sufficient to simply improve
the capabilities of the optimization procedure. The hybrid
procedure in Table I does provide better modeling errors in
many instances, but it is only when the underlying characteristics
of the device and the data are exploited that the results of Table II
are obtained. The importance of this is that many published
algorithms focus exclusively on improving the capabilities of
the optimization algorithm used. Both the experiments in Table I

900

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2003

Fig. 6.

Comparison of the extracted values of the parasitic extrinsic resistors
, and R for three of the experiments presented in Tables I and II.
Experiment 1 refers to the first test presented in Table I, while experiments 3
and 4 refer to Table II.

R ; R

produced elements of whom the majority have values that are
physically believable. The exceptions are the parasitic gate and
and
.
has a wide range of extracted
drain resistors
values, with many tending to the lower optimization boundary.
is far less, the value of
is far
While the variation in
larger than what is realistically expected from such an HEMT
device. The first experiment in Table II shows that the inclusion
of the cold -parameter data dramatically improves the range
of solutions obtained for the extrinsic elements. The mean
, and
are
and best values of the parasitic resistors
in their values
closer to each other, but the total variation
decreases considerably with
is still large. This variation
the use of active bias points selected with the diversity-driven
selection procedure, as is illustrated by the second experiment
in Table II. A comparison of the results in Tables I and II also
shows that the various extensions discussed cause a decrease in
the difference between the average element values and the best
element values for the majority of the extrinsic parameters.
The extrinsic elements obtained from the two experiments
summarized in Table II are also consistent in their values with
each other, despite using different active bias points for the
extractions.
A more graphical representation of the test results is given
in Figs. 6 and 7. Fig. 6 contains the variation of the three para, and
obtained in three of the robustness
sitic resistors
tests, namely the first experiment in Table I and the two experiments described in Table II. Fig. 7 provides similar results, but
and
and the parasitic infor the parasitic capacitors
ductance . Experience has shown that, of the three parasitic
can be surprisingly difficult to extract. Figs. 6 and
inductors,
7 clearly indicates how the extensions discussed in this paper
help to improve the consistency of the solutions obtained. It also
shows the wide range of optimization starting values used in the
extractions.
Fig. 8 compares the modeled and the measured -parameters
V and
mA. The
for the bias point
quality of the fit between the modeled and measured -parameters seen in Fig. 8 represents the largest modeling errors of all

Fig. 7. Comparison of the extracted values of the parasitic extrinsic reactive
elements C ; C , and L for three of the experiments presented in Tables I
and II. Experiment 1 refers to the first test presented in Table I, while
experiments 3 and 4 refer to Table II.

Fig. 8. Comparison of the measured and modeled S -parameters for the bias
point that resulted in the largest modeling error. This bias point is close to the
knee region of the device I –V curves, which is one of the most difficult
areas to model accurately. The measured data is represented by the  markers,
while the model generated S -parameters are depicted with the solid line.

the bias points used in the extraction. The indicated bias point
–
is the closest selected point to the knee region of the
plane, a difficult area to model. The largest deviations occur in
and
and it is suspected that this is due to the omission
in the small-signal model.
is also smaller in this reof
polar chart. For all
gion, as is evident from the scale of the
the bias points further from the knee region, the modeling deand
are not present and an excellent fit is
viations in
achieved between the modeled and measured data. What is also
clear from Fig. 8 is that the quality of the measured data is high,
with no visible signs of resonances or other measurement deviations that can be used to explain the extraction difficulties
experienced with this particular device.
The work in [4] and [5] contain the only comparable experimental results for HEMT devices of which we are aware. In both

VAN NIEKERK et al.: FET PARAMETER EXTRACTION ALGORITHM WITH INTELLIGENT BIAS POINT SELECTION

cases, results are presented for optimization-orientated multibias extraction algorithms that have been subjected to a large
number of randomly chosen starting values. Lin and Kompa [4]
performed multibias extractions on a chip device that was wire
bonded into a test fixture. This leads to far larger extrinsic inductors than those obtained from on-wafer measurements. The
larger extrinsic reactive elements greatly help with the separation of the different elements, a fact that was confirmed with
simulated measurements generated using the published model
parameters [17].
Ghazinour and Jansen [5] presented results from on-wafer
-parameters extracted with a hybrid evolumeasured
tionary/gradient optimization algorithm. Unfortunately, the
data in [5] do not make it possible to perform a complete
comparison. Ghazinour and Jansen [5] summarize the obtained
results by providing the average and the standard deviation
of the extracted elements but presents no further information
regarding the distribution of the extracted elements. The best
individual returned by the evolutionary search, namely the set
of model elements providing lowest modeling error, is also
not listed. The danger of only using the average and standard
deviation in the presentation of the data is that the distribution
of the extracted elements is in many instances not Gaussian
[2], [17]. When a search fails to find an element, that element
in many cases will tend to one of the optimization boundaries.
The average value of the element will not always reflect this.
Neither will the standard deviation do so if, as in most cases,
one of the optimization boundaries are favored. An example
in the first
of this behavior can be seen for the element
experiment in Table I and by looking at the graphical plot of the
values in Fig. 6. In the discussion of the results
extracted
in [5], it is also stated that the values of the parasitic resistors
and
are very low compared to what is expected from
physical considerations.
In order to provide comparative results with [5], the last
experiment in Table II was repeated 100 times using random
starting values. The standard deviation of the elements was
calculated and is expressed as a percentage of the average
values obtained. The values found in [5] are also listed. The
, the new
comparison shows that, with the exception of
procedure provides similar or smaller standard deviations for
the reactive extrinsic elements. The average value reported
in [5] is 18.30 pH, which is considerably larger than
for
the value listed in Table II. Such a large source inductance
will have a far more dominant effect on the system, greatly
influencing its extraction accuracy. The parasitic resistors
and
have larger standard deviations than those reported
in [5], but their values correspond to what is expected from
physical considerations and the solutions are centred around
the average element values.
VI. CONCLUSION
An improved multibias extraction procedure for GaAs FETs
has been presented. The experimental results show that the algorithm is starting value-independent and that it consistently converges to a very small range of solutions for all the model elements. The procedure exploits both the power of a new hybrid

901

search algorithm and the underlying characteristic of the device
and the measured -parameter data to achieve this.
The hybrid optimizer that was discussed favors neither the analytical nor the optimization algorithm. Instead it uses both, accepting the solution that provides the best modeling results. The
new analytical calculations are easily integrated into the existing
multibias search and add very little computational overhead to
the search.
The parameter extraction algorithm also exploits the underlying characteristics of both the device and the measured
-parameter data to further increase its accuracy. While the
use of cold bias points to achieve this goal has certain elements
in common with direct extraction algorithms, the presented
diversity selection algorithm takes the exploitation of the
-parameter characteristics to a new level. The algorithms
discussed are made possible by using a simple geometric
abstraction for the -parameter curves. Further uses for these
simple geometric representations of -parameter data are
currently being investigated.
A full 15-element small-signal model was extracted from
measured -parameter data using a wide range of randomly
chosen optimization starting values. The accuracy of the
procedure is such that there is less than a 0.2- difference between the average and the best solution of the extracted values
, and
. For the
of nondominant elements such as
reactive extrinsic elements, the difference between the average
and best element values are less than 1.5 nH for the parasitic
inductors and less than 1.4 fF for the extrinsic capacitors. This
indicates a very high consistency in the solutions obtained by
the extraction procedure.
For the development of table-based nonlinear models,
-parameters are measured at anything between 500 and 1300
bias points using an automated measurement system [18]. The
parameter extraction approach that has been presented in this
paper has attained the required level of robustness that allows
it to efficiently process such large data sets. It forms an integral
part of algorithms used in the generation of nonlinear models
for the purposes of design and technology evaluation [9].

REFERENCES
[1] G. Dambrine, A. Cappy, F. Heliodore, and E. Playez, “A new method
for determining the FET small-signal equivalent circuit,” IEEE Trans.
Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 36, pp. 1151–1159, July 1988.
[2] C. van Niekerk and P. Meyer, “Performance and limitations of decomposition-based parameter-extraction procedures for FET small-signal
models,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 46, pp. 1620–1627,
Nov. 1998.
[3] C. van Niekerk, P. Meyer, D. Schreurs, and P. Winson, “A robust integrated multi-bias parameter extraction method for MESFET and HEMT
models,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 48, pp. 777–786,
May 2000.
[4] F. Lin and G. Kompa, “FET model parameter extraction based on optimization with multiplane data-fitting and bidirectional search—A new
concept,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 42, pp. 1114–1121,
July 1994.
[5] A. Ghazinour and R. H. Jansen, “Robust, model-independant generation
of intrinsic characteristics and multi-bias parameter extraction for MESFETs/HEMTs,” in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1998, pp.
149–152.
[6] A. Eskandarian and S. Weinreb, “A note on experimental determination of small-signal equivalent circuit of millimeter-wave FETs,” IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 41, pp. 159–162, Jan. 1993.

902

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MICROWAVE THEORY AND TECHNIQUES, VOL. 51, NO. 3, MARCH 2003

[7] R. Anholt and S. Swirhum, “Equivalent-circuit parameter extraction for
cold GaAs MESFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 38,
pp. 1243–1247, July 1991.
[8] K. Shirakawa, H. Oikawa, T. Shimura, Y. Kawasaki, Y. Ohashi, T. Saito,
and Y. Daido, “An approach to determining an equivalent circuit for
HEMT’s,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 43, pp. 499–503,
Mar. 1995.
[9] D. Schreurs, C. van Niekerk, R. Vandersmissen, and G. Borghs, “Development of extraction and optimization based large-signal models for
thinned metamorphic HEMT’s on germanium,” Int. J. RF Microwave
Computer-Aided Eng., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 439–447, Sept. 2002.
[10] M. Berroth and R. Bosch, “Broad-band determination of the FET smallsignal equivalent circuit,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 38,
pp. 891–895, July 1990.
[11] T. González and D. Pardo, “Monte Carlo determination of the intrinsic
small-signal equivalent circuit of MESFET’s,” IEEE Trans. Electron
Devices, vol. 42, pp. 605–611, Apr. 1995.
[12] D. Schreurs, Y. Baeyens, B. K. J. C. Nauwelaers, W. De Raedt, M.
Van Hove, and M. Van Rossum, “S -Parameter measurement based quasistatic large-signal cold HEMT model for resistive mixer design,” Int.
J. Microwave Millimeter-Wave Computer-Aided Eng., vol. 6, no. 4, pp.
250–258, 1996.
[13] R. Anholt, Electrical and Thermal Characterization of MESFET’s,
HEMT’s, and HBTs. Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1995.
[14] J. Staudinger, E. Y. Lan, R. Vaitkus, R. Lucero, and J. Hallmark, “An
examination of data based large signal models for wireless amplifiers,”
in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microwave Symp. Dig., 1996, pp. 1747–1750.
[15] P. Jansen, D. Schreurs, W. de Raedt, B. Nauwelaers, and M. Van Rossum,
“Consistent small-signal and large-signal extraction techniques for heterojunction FET’s,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. 43, pp.
87–93, Jan. 1995.
[16] Y. Baeyens, T. Skrabka, M. Van Hove, W. De Raedt, B. Nauwelaers, and
M. Van Rossum, “Performance of 0.2 m planar doped pseudomorfic
and lattice matched HEMT’s on GaAs and InP for millimeterwave applications,” in Proc. 23rd Eur. Solid State Device Research Conf., Grenoble,
France, Sept. 13–16, 1993, pp. 753–756.
[17] C. van Niekerk, “Multi-bias decomposition-based optimization for the
extraction of small-signal GaAs FET models,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ.
Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South Africa, 1999.
[18] D. Schreurs, “Measurement based modeling of heterojunction field-effect devices for non-linear microwave circuit design,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Catholic Univ. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 1997.

Cornell van Niekerk (S’97–M’99) received the
M.Eng. and Ph.D.(Eng.) degrees from the University
of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, South Africa, in 1996
and 1999, respectively.
In 1998, he joined the staff of the Department of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University
of Stellenbosch, where he is currently a Senior
Lecturer. His current research interests are the
extraction of transistor CAD models and the use
of optimization techniques for the synthesis and
refinement of high-frequency designs.

Johan A. du Preez (M’92) was born in South Africa,
in 1958. He received the Ph.D. degree in electronic
engineering from the University of Stellenbosch,
Stellenbosch, South Africa, in 1998. His dissertation
focused on efficient high-order hidden Markov
modeling.
After an initial four years with the Telecommunications Sector, he joined the Electrical and Electronic
Engineering Department, University of Stellenbosch,
in mid-1989. Active in the broader fields of signal
processing and pattern recognition, his research focuses on biometrics and speech processing.

Dominique M. M.-P. Schreurs (S’90–M’97–
SM’02) received the M.Sc. degree in electronic
engineering and Ph.D. degree (with honors) from
the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (K.U.Leuven),
Leuven, Belgium, in 1992 and 1997, respectively.
She is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with
the Fund for Scientific Research-Vlaanderen and a
Visiting Assistant Professor with the K.U.Leuven.
She has been a Visiting Scientist with Agilent
Technologies, the Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule (ETH), Zürich, Switzerland, and the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Her main research interest is the use of vectorial large-signal measurements for the characterization
and modeling of nonlinear microwave devices.

