3/25/2014 Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com

Dow Jones Reprints: This copy isfor your personal, non-oommercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues
clients or customers use the Order Reprintstool at the bottom of any article or vis't www.djrepﬁntsoom

. See a sample reprint in PDF format. - Ordera reprint of this article now

 

WHAT THEY KNOW

Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users'
Information

ByJENNIFER VALENTINO-DEVRIES, JEREMY SINGER-VINE and ASHKAN SOLTANI
Decenber 24,2012

It was the same Swingline stapler, on the same Staples.com website. But for Kim Wamble, the price was
$15.79, while the price on Trude Frizzell's screen, just a few miles away, was $14.29.

A key difference: where Staples seemed to think they were located.

AWall Street Journal investigation found that the Staples Inc. website displays different prices to people after
estimating their locations. More than that, Staples appeared to consider the person's distance from a rival
brick—and-mortar store, either OfﬁceMax Inc. or Ofﬁce Depot Inc. if rival stores were within 20 miles or so,
Staples.com usually showed a discounted price.

 

What Price Would You See? "How can they get away with that?" said Ms. Frizzell, who
works in Bergheim, Texas.

In what appears to be an unintended side effect of Staples'
pricing methods—Iikely a function of retail competition with its
rivals—the Journal's testing also showed that areas that
tended to see the discounted prices had a higher average
income than areas that tended to see higher prices.

Presented with the Journal's ﬁndings, Staples acknowledged
that it varies its online and in-store prices by geography
because of "a variety of factors" including "costs of doing

Digits ’ business."
How the Journal Tested Prices and Deals
Online

 

 

For years, the Internet, with its promise of quick com parison
shopping, has granted people a certain power over retailers.
At the click of a button, shoppers could ﬁnd a better deal elsewhere, no travel required.

t giving way to an online world that, in reality, is
Increasmgly tauoreo ano targeteo. vveosntes are aoopting techniques to glean information about visitors to
their sites, in real time, and then deliver different versions of the Web to different people. Prices change,
products get swapped out, wording is modiﬁed, and there is little way for the typical website user to spot it
when it happens.

http:#onlineMSj.oomlneuslarticles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534#prinw ode 1/6

3/25/2014 Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com

The Journal identiﬁed several com panies, including Staples,
Eﬂﬂﬁﬂﬂﬂm Mmmﬂw Discover Financial Services, Rosetta Stone Inc. and Home
Exim ﬂﬂﬁﬂﬂ'ﬁm Mm Depot Inc., that were consistently adjusting prices and

displaying different product offers based on a range of
characteristics that could be discovered about the user. Ofﬁce
Depot, for exam ple, told the Journal that it uses "customers'
browsing history and geolocation" to vary the offers and

products it displays to a visitor to its site.

   

Offering different prices to different people is legal, with a few
exceptions for race-based discrimination and other sensitive
SnapSafe; Home Depot; Rosetta Stone situations. Several com panies pointed out that their online
price—tweaking simply mirrors the real world. Regular shops
routinely adjust their prices to account for local demand, competition, store location and so on. Nobody is
surprised if, say, a gallon of gas is cheaper at the same chain, one town over.

w-wrmanho-nuuna www.i-

But price—changing online isn't popular among shoppers. Some 76% of American adults have said it would
bother them to ﬁnd out that other people paid a lower price for the same product, according to the Annenberg
Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania.

"I think it's very discriminatory," said Ms. Wamble, an
insurance account manager in Boerne, Texas, who priced the
Swingline stapler for the Journal this month. She was just 10
miles or so down the road from Ms. Frizzell, but she saw
higher prices on the Staples website than Ms. Frizzell did for
all ﬁve products tested. items tested included a pack of Bic
pens, a case of orange masking tape, a set of crimped-end
mailing tubes and a big safe.

 

It remains unclear precisely what formula Staples used to set

Staples.com appears to tweak prices based on a . . . . .
person's proxim'ty to rival stores. h Texas, Trude online prices. Staples declined to answer detailed questions

Frizze'L m ?a‘”? dis°°um °." a S.‘” "‘9'” StaP'e' about the ﬁndings. It told the Journal that "in-store and online
corrpared w Ith Kim Warrble, right, Just a few mles

aw ay. Catalin Abagiu for The Wall StreetJournaI (2) prices do vary by geography due to a variety of factors,
including rent, labor, distribution and other costs of doing

business."

It is possible that Staples' online—pricing form ula uses other factors that the Journal didn't identify. The
Journal tested to see whether price was tied to different characteristics including population, local income,
proximity to a Staples store, race and other demographic factors. Statistically speaking, by far the strongest
correlation involved the distance to a rival's store from the center of a ZIP Code. That single factor appeared
to explain upward of 90% of the pricing pattern.

What economists call price discrimination—when com panies offer different prices to different people based
on their perceived willingness to pay—is commonplace and can be beneﬁcial. Movie theaters give senior-
citizen discounts. One traveler's willingness to pay top dollar for an airplane seat might mean other people
will pay less.

In other cases, though, shoppers can be the loser. That same airline might easilyjust pocket the big
spender's extra money and leave other prices unchanged.

htlp:llon|ine.ij.oom/neus/articles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534#prinﬂl/| ode 2/6

3/25/2014 Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com

Of course, not all price differences are instances of price discrimination. Prices driven down by competition
wouldn't generally be considered discriminatory, for example.

 

Three Years of Privacy Insights >

MATCHED

The Wall Street Journal is
conducting a long-running
investigation into the profound
transforrration of personal privacy
in Arrerica.

 

Selected findings:

The Wall Street Journal reconstructs the
clash over the counterterrorism program
within the administration of President Barack
Obama. (12/12/12)

Com panies todayare increasingly tying
people's real-life identities to their online
browsing habits. (12/07/12)

Two students are outed as gay—provoking a
crisis within their families—bya Facebook
privacy loophole . {10/12/12)

Suspicious spouses are taking
investigations into their own hands as
snooping technologies become cheaper and
easierto use. (10/6/12)

Americans' license plates are now being
tracked not only by the government, but also
by repo men who hope to proﬁtfrom the
information. {10/2/12}

Google bypassed the privacysettings on
millions ofWeb browsers on Apple iPhones
and computers— tracking the online
activities of people who intended that kind of
monitoring to be blocked. (2/17/12)

The governmentfollows the movements of
thousands ofAmericans a year bysecretly
monitoring their cellphone records . (9/9/1 1)

iPhone and Android apps secretlyshared
data aboutlheir users, a Journal investigation
found. (12/10/10)

Top apps on Facebook transmit personal
identifying details to tracking com panies, a
Journal investigaﬁon found. {10/18/10)

Plus, the global surveillance bazaar , a
secretive phone-tracking "stingray" and
RapLeal's clever way of ﬁguring outWeb
surfers' real names .

See full privacy coverage

Basing online prices on geography can make sense for
various reasons, from shipping costs to local popularity of a
particular item. Some retailers might naturally cluster in
speciﬁc areas as well—a prosperous suburb, say—boosting
the competitive pressure to discount.

But using geography as a pricing tool can also reinforce
patterns that e-commerce had promised to erase: prices that
are higher in areas with less com petition, including rural or
poor areas. it diminishes the Internet's role as an equalizer.

In the Journal's examination of Staples' online pricing, the
weighted average income among ZIP Codes that mostly
received discount prices was roughly $59,900, based on
Internal Revenue Service data. ZIP Codes that saw generally
high prices had a lower weighted average income, $48,700.

Staples didn't comment on the income split beyond saying
that the company offers a low-price guarantee.

Online businesses have experimented with tailored offers
since the dawn of the Internet era. In 1997, a startup called
Personify sold software that tried to personalize Web pages
for shoppers. For exam ple, people taking a certain path
through a site could be tagged as price—conscious and be
shown low-end items, said Eileen Gittins, Personify‘s former
chief executive.

"The idea was more advanced than the technology could
support at the time," said Ms. Gittins. Today she runs an
online company, Blurb, that lets people make books using
their own photos.

In 2000, Amazon.com Inc. infuriated many customers when it
sold DVDs to different people for different prices. Amazon
called it merely a test and ultimately refunded the price
difference to people who paid more.

In 2010, the Journal reported that Capital One Financial Corp.
was using personalization technology to decide which credit

cards to show ﬁrst—time visitors to its website. Recent Journal follow-up testing indicated that Capital One
was showing different users different cards ﬁrst—either those for "excellent credit" or "average credit."

Capital One says it gathers data about visitors while they are on its website and uses this information to
suggest different products to them. "We do not use any of this data in credit decisioning or undenNriting," a
Capital One spokeswoman said. "We're making an educated guess about what we think consumers will

http://on|ine.ij.oom/neus/articles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534#prinﬂl/| ode 3/6

3/25/2014 Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com

|ike.‘I

This year, researchers in Spain studied more than 200 online

retailers and found a handful of examples of price differences

—including at Staples within Massachusetts—that appeared

to be based on location and other factors. Those ﬁndings

suggest that Staples' price adjustments have been present at
least since this summer.

It is difﬁcult for online shoppers to know why, or even if, they are being offered different deals from other
people. Many sites switch prices at lightning speed in response to competitors' offerings and other factors, a
practice known as "dynamic pricing." Other sites test different prices but do so without regard to the buyer's
characteristics.

To ﬁnd differences that weren't purely the result of dynamic pricing or randomized tests, the Journal
conducted preliminary scans by sim ulating vis its from different com puters to a variety of e-commerce sites.
If a website showed different prices or offers, the Journal then analyzed the site's computer code and
conducted follow-up testing.

The Journal's tests, which were conducted in phases between August and December, indicated that some
big—name retailers are experimenting with offering different prices and products to different users.

Some sites, for exam ple, gave discounts based on whether or not a person was using a mobile device. A
person searching for hotels from the Web browser of an iPhone or Android phone on travel sites Orbitz and
CheapTickets would see discounts of as much as 50% off the list price, Orbitz said.

 

Both sites are run by Orbitz Worldwide Inc., which in fact markets the differences as "mobile steals." Orbitz
says the deals are also available on the iPad if a person installs the Orbitz app.

"Many hotels have proven willing to provide discounts for mobile sites," said Chris Chiames, Orbitz's vice
president of corporate affairs. Hotels on Orbitz mobile sites also offer discounts "that might target shoppers
in a speciﬁc geographic region," as determined by the physical location of the user, as well as "other
factors."

Often, sites tailored results by geography. In the tests, Discover, for instance, showed a prominent offer for
the company's new "it" card to computers connecting from cities including Denver, Kansas City, Mo., and
Dallas, Texas. Com puters connecting from Scranton, Penn., Kingsport, Tenn., and Los Angeles didn't see
the same offer.

A Discover spokeswoman said that the com pany was testing the card, but that for com petitive reasons, it
wouldn't comment further on its "acquisition strategy" for new customers.

At home—improvement site Lowe's Cos., prices depend on location. For example, a refrigerator in the
Journal's tests cost $449 in Chicago, Los Angeles and Ashburn, Va., but $499 in seven other test cities.
Lowe's said online shoppers receive the lower of the online store price or the price at their local Lowe's store
as indicated by their ZIP Code.

Home Depot's website offered price variations that appeared to be based on the nearest brick—and-mortar
store as well. A 250-foot spool of electrical wiring fell into six pricing groups, including $70.80 in Ashtabula,
Ohio; $72.45 in Erie, Pa.; $75.98 in Olean, NY and $77.87 in Monticello, N.Y.

http://on|ine.ij.oom/neus/articles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534#prinﬂl/| ode 4/6

3/25/2014 Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com

The company said it uses "IP address," a num ber assigned to devices that connect to the Internet, to try to
match users to the closest store and align online prices accordingly.

Location also seemed to be im portant for some international companies. The Journal saw Rosetta Stone,
which sells software for learning languages, offering discounts of as much as 20% for people who bought
multiple levels of its German lessons from certain locations in the U.S. or Canada, but not others from the
UK. or Argentina.

Rosetta Stone said it sometimes tests and offers different product "bundles" in different places. it also
personalizes its suggestions based on how the visitor gets to the site, Rosetta Stone said—whether from a
search engine, a social—media link, a mobile device or a PC. "We are increasingly focused on segmentation
and targeting," a spokesman said. "Every customer is different."

The differences found on the Staples website presented a complex pricing scheme. The Journal sim ulated
visits to Staples.com from all of the more than 42,000 U.S. ZIP Codes, testing the price of a Swingline stapler
20 times in each. In addition, the Journal tested more than 1,000 different products in 10 selected ZIP Codes,
10 times in each location.

The Journal saw as many as three different prices for individual items. How frequently a sim ulated visitor
saw low and high prices appeared to be tied to the person's ZIP Code. Testing suggested that Staples tries
to deduce people's ZIP Codes by looking at their computer's IP address. This can be accurate, but isn't
foolproof.

In the Journal's tests, ZIP Codes whose center was farther than 20 miles from a Staples competitor saw
higher prices 67% of the time. By contrast, ZIP Codes within 20 miles of a rival saw the high price least often,
only 12% of the time.

Staples.com showed higher prices most often—86% of the time—when the ZIP Code actually had a brick-
and-mortar Staples store in it, but was also far from a competitor's store. In calculating these percentages,
the Journal excluded New York City and used the more than 29,000 "standard" ZIP Codes in the 50 states
and District of Columbia. This meant things like ZIP Codes with only post—ofﬁce boxes weren't counted.

Prices varied for about a third of the more than 1,000 randomly selected Staples.com products tested. The
discounted and higher prices differed by about 8% on average.

There were a few areas of the U.S. and its territories that offer exceptions. The Journal found that Puerto
Rico was generally shown the higher prices no matter how close the ZIP Code was to local OfﬁceMax or
Ofﬁce Depot outlets. For Guam, on the other hand, tests of Staples.com almost always returned the lower
prices, even though the nearest U.S. OfﬁceMax or Ofﬁce Depot is listed online as being in Hawaii, nearly
4,000 miles away.

New York City, too, appeared to be a special case. Tests of Staples.com using ZIP Codes in the boroughs of
the Bronx, Nlanhattan and Staten Island consistently saw higher prices, while Brooklyn and Queens saw
almost only the discounted prices. This despite the fact that all parts of New York City look to be within 20
miles of a Staples competitor, according to the websites.

As a ﬁnal test, the Journal ordered two separate Swingline staplers from Staples.com, from two nearby ZIP
Codes—one costing $14.29 and the other one $15.79. The staplers arrived the same day. They appear to be
indistinguishable from one another and do an equally thorough job of stapling.

http://on|ine.ij.oom/neus/articles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534#prinﬂl/| ode 5/6

3/25/2014 Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based on Users' Information - WSJ.com
Write to Jennifer Valentino-DeVries at Jennifer.Valentino-DeVries@wsi.com

Copyright 2013 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
This copy isfor your pemnal, non-oommercial use only. Diiribution and use of this material are governed by our SubmriberAgreement and by
copyright law. For non-personal use or to order multiple copies please contact Dow Jones Reprints at 1-800-843-0008 or vis't
www.djrepri ntsoom

http://on|ine.ij.oom/neus/articles/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534#prinﬂl/| ode

6/6

