The Tyranny of Data?
The Bright and Dark Sides of
Data-Driven Decision-Making for
Social Good

arXiv:1612.00323v2 [cs.CY] 2 Dec 2016

Bruno Lepri, Jacopo Staiano, David Sangokoya, Emmanuel Letouzé and
Nuria Oliver

Abstract The unprecedented availability of large-scale human behavioral
data is profoundly changing the world we live in. Researchers, companies,
governments, financial institutions, non-governmental organizations and also
citizen groups are actively experimenting, innovating and adapting algorithmic decision-making tools to understand global patterns of human behavior
and provide decision support to tackle problems of societal importance. In this
chapter, we focus our attention on social good decision-making algorithms,
that is algorithms strongly influencing decision-making and resource optimization of public goods, such as public health, safety, access to finance and
fair employment. Through an analysis of specific use cases and approaches,
we highlight both the positive opportunities that are created through datadriven algorithmic decision-making, and the potential negative consequences
that practitioners should be aware of and address in order to truly realize
the potential of this emergent field. We elaborate on the need for these algorithms to provide transparency and accountability, preserve privacy and be
tested and evaluated in context, by means of living lab approaches involving
citizens. Finally, we turn to the requirements which would make it possible to
leverage the predictive power of data-driven human behavior analysis while
ensuring transparency, accountability, and civic participation.
Bruno Lepri
Fondazione Bruno Kessler e-mail: lepri@fbk.eu
Jacopo Staiano
Fortia Financial Solutions e-mail: jacopo.staiano@fortia.fr
David Sangokoya
Data-Pop Alliance e-mail: dsangokoya@datapopalliance.org
Emmanuel Letouzé
Data-Pop Alliance and MIT Media Lab e-mail: eletouze@mit.edu
Nuria Oliver
Data-Pop Alliance e-mail: nuria@alum.mit.edu

1

2

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

1 Introduction
The world is experiencing an unprecedented transition where human behavioral data has evolved from being a scarce resource to being a massive and
real-time stream. This availability of large-scale data is profoundly changing the world we live in and has led to the emergence of a new discipline
called computational social science [45]; finance, economics, marketing, public health, medicine, biology, politics, urban science and journalism, to name
a few, have all been disrupted to some degree by this trend [41].
Moreover, the automated analysis of anonymized and aggregated largescale human behavioral data offers new possibilities to understand global
patterns of human behavior and to help decision makers tackle problems
of societal importance [45], such as monitoring socio-economic deprivation [8, 75, 76, 88] and crime [11, 10, 84, 85, 90], mapping the propagation of diseases [37, 94], or understanding the impact of natural disasters
[55, 62, 97]. Thus, researchers, companies, governments, financial institutions,
non-governmental organizations and also citizen groups are actively experimenting, innovating and adapting algorithmic decision-making tools, often
relying on the analysis of personal information.
However, researchers from different disciplinary backgrounds have identified a range of social, ethical and legal issues surrounding data-driven
decision-making, including privacy and security [19, 22, 23, 56], transparency
and accountability [18, 61, 99, 100], and bias and discrimination [3, 79]. For
example, Barocas and Selbst [3] point out that the use of data-driven decision
making processes can result in disproportionate adverse outcomes for disadvantaged groups, in ways that look like discrimination. Algorithmic decisions
can reproduce patterns of discrimination, due to decision makers’ prejudices
[60], or reflect the biases present in the society [60]. In 2014, the White House
released a report, titled “Big Data: Seizing opportunities, preserving values”
[65] that highlights the discriminatory potential of big data, including how
it could undermine longstanding civil rights protections governing the use of
personal information for credit, health, safety, employment, etc. For example, data-driven decisions about applicants for jobs, schools or credit may be
affected by hidden biases that tend to flag individuals from particular demographic groups as unfavorable for such opportunities. Such outcomes can
be self-reinforcing, since systematically reducing individuals’ access to credit,
employment and educational opportunities may worsen their situation, which
can play against them in future applications.
In this chapter, we focus our attention on social good algorithms, that is
algorithms strongly influencing decision-making and resource optimization of
public goods, such as public health, safety, access to finance and fair employment. These algorithms are of particular interest given the magnitude of
their impact on quality of life and the risks associated with the information
asymmetry surrounding their governance.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

3

In a recent book, William Easterly evaluates how global economic development and poverty alleviation projects have been governed by a “tyranny of
experts” – in this case, aid agencies, economists, think tanks and other analysts – who consistently favor top-down, technocratic governance approaches
at the expense of the individual rights of citizens [28]. Easterly details how
these experts reduce multidimensional social phenomena such as poverty or
justice into a set of technical solutions that do not take into account either
the political systems in which they operate or the rights of intended beneficiaries. Take for example the displacement of farmers in the Mubende district
of Uganda: as a direct result of a World Bank project intended to raise the region’s income by converting land to higher value uses, farmers in this district
were forcibly removed from their homes by government soldiers in order to
prepare for a British company to plant trees in the area [28]. Easterly underlines the cyclic nature of this tyranny: technocratic justifications for specific
interventions are considered objective; intended beneficiaries are unaware of
the opaque, black box decision-making involved in these resource optimization interventions; and experts (and the coercive powers which employ them)
act with impunity and without redress.
If we turn to the use, governance and deployment of big data approaches in
the public sector, we can draw several parallels towards what we refer to as the
“tyranny of data”, that is the adoption of data-driven decision-making under
the technocratic and top-down approaches higlighted by Easterly [28]. We
elaborate on the need for social good decision-making algorithms to provide
transparency and accountability, to only use personal information – owned
and controlled by individuals – with explicit consent, to ensure that privacy is
preserved when data is analyzed in aggregated and anonymized form, and to
be tested and evaluated in context, that is by means of living lab approaches
involving citizens. In our view, these characteristics are crucial for fair datadriven decision-making as well as for citizen engagement and participation.
In the rest of this chapter, we provide the readers with a compendium
of the issues arising from current big data approaches, with a particular focus on specific use cases that have been carried out to date, including urban
crime prediction [10], inferring socioeconomic status of countries and individuals [8, 49, 76], mapping the propagation of diseases [37, 94] and modeling
individuals’ mental health [9, 20, 47]. Furthermore, we highlight factors of
risk (e.g. privacy violations, lack of transparency and discrimination) that
might arise when decisions potentially impacting the daily lives of people are
heavily rooted in the outcomes of black-box data-driven predictive models.
Finally, we turn to the requirements which would make it possible to leverage
the predictive power of data-driven human behavior analysis while ensuring
transparency, accountability, and civic participation.

4

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

2 The rise of data-driven decision-making for social
good
The unprecedented stream of large-scale, human behavioral data has been
described as a “tidal wave” of opportunities to both predict and act upon
the analysis of the petabytes of digital signals and traces of human actions and
interactions. With such massive streams of relevant data to mine and train
algorithms with, as well as increased analytical and technical capacities, it is
of no surprise that companies and public sector actors are turning to machine
learning-based algorithms to tackle complex problems at the limits of human
decision-making [36, 96]. The history of human decision-making – particularly
when it comes to questions of power in resource allocation, fairness, justice,
and other public goods – is wrought with innumerable examples of extreme
bias, leading towards corrupt, inefficient or unjust processes and outcomes [2,
34, 70, 87]. In short, human decision-making has shown significant limitations
and the turn towards data-driven algorithms reflects a search for objectivity,
evidence-based decision-making, and a better understanding of our resources
and behaviors.
Diakopoulos [27] characterizes the function and power of algorithms in
four broad categories: 1) classification, the categorization of information into
separate “classes”, based on its features; 2) prioritization, the denotation
of emphasis and rank on particular information or results at the expense of
others based on a pre-defined set of criteria; 3) association, the determination
of correlated relationships between entities; and 4) filtering, the inclusion or
exclusion of information based on pre-determined criteria.
Table 1 provides examples of types of algorithms across these categories.
Table 1 Algorithmic function and examples, adapted from Diakopoulos [27] and Latzer
et al. [44]
Function

Type
General and search engines,
meta search engines, semantic
Prioritization
search engines, questions &
answers services
Classification
Association
Filtering

Examples
Google, Bing, Baidu;
image search; social
media; Quora; Ask.com

Ebay, Uber, Airbnb;
Reddit, Digg;
CreditKarma; Klout
Predicting developments and
ScoreAhit, Music Xray,
trends
Google Flu Trends
Spam filters, child protection filters, Norton; Net Nanny;
recommender systems, news
Spotify, Netflix;
aggregators
Facebook Newsfeed
Reputation systems, news scoring,
credit scoring, social scoring

This chapter places emphasis on what we call social good algorithms – algorithms strongly influencing decision-making and resource optimization for

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

5

public goods. These algorithms are designed to analyze massive amounts
of human behavioral data from various sources and then, based on predetermined criteria, select the information most relevant to their intended
purpose. While resource allocation and decision optimization over limited resources remain common features of the public sector, the use of social good
algorithms brings to a new level the amount of human behavioral data that
public sector actors can access, the capacities with which they can analyze this
information and deliver results, and the communities of experts and common
people who hold these results to be objective. The ability of these algorithms
to identify, select and determine information of relevance beyond the scope of
human decision-making creates a new kind of decision optimization faciliated
by both the design of the algorithms and the data from which they are based.
However, as discussed later in the chapter, this new process is often opaque
and assumes a level of impartiality that is not always accurate. It also creates
information asymmetry and lack of transparency between actors using these
algorithms and the intended beneficiaries whose data is being used.
In the following sub-sections, we assess the nature, function and impact
of the use of social good algorithms in three key areas: criminal behavior
dynamics and predictive policing; socio-economic deprivation and financial
inclusion; and public health.

2.1 Criminal behavior dynamics and predictive policing
Researchers have turned their attention to the automatic analysis of criminal
behavior dynamics both from a people- and a place-centric perspectives. The
people-centric perspective has mostly been used for individual or collective
criminal profiling [67, 72, 91]. For example, Wang et al. [91] proposed a machine learning approach, called Series Finder, to the problem of detecting
specific patterns in crimes that are committed by the same offender or group
of offenders.
In 2008, the criminologist David Weisburd proposed a shift from a peoplecentric paradigm of police practices to a place-centric one [93], thus focusing
on geographical topology and micro-structures rather than on criminal profiling. An example of a place-centric perspective is the detection, analysis, and
interpretation of crime hotspots [16, 29, 53]. Along these lines, a novel application of quantitative tools from mathematics, physics and signal processing
has been proposed by Toole et al. [84] to analyse spatial and temporal patterns in criminal offense records. Their analyses of crime data from 1991 to
1999 for the American city of Philadelphia indicated the existence of multiscale complex relationships in space and time. Further, over the last few years,
aggregated and anonymized mobile phone data has opened new possibilities
to study city dynamics with unprecedented temporal and spatial granular-

6

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

ities [7]. Recent work has used this type of data to predict crime hotspots
through machine-learning algorithms [10, 11, 85].
More recently, these predictive policing approaches [64] are moving from
the academic realm (universities and research centers) to police departments.
In Chicago, police officers are paying particular attention to those individuals flagged, through risk analysis techniques, as most likely to be involved
in future violence. In Santa Cruz, California, the police have reported a dramatic reduction in burglaries after adopting algorithms that predict where
new burglaries are likely to occur. In Charlotte, North Carolina, the police
department has generated a map of high-risk areas that are likely to be hit
by crime. The Police Departments of Los Angeles, Atlanta and more than
50 other cities in the US are using PredPol, an algorithm that generates 500
by 500 square foot predictive boxes on maps, indicating areas where crime
is most likely to occur. Similar approaches have also been implemented in
Brasil, the UK and the Netherlands. Overall, four main predictive policing
approaches are currently being used: (i) methods to forecast places and times
with an increased risk of crime [32], (ii) methods to detect offenders and flag
individuals at risk of offending in the future [64], (iii) methods to identify
perpetrators [64], and (iv) methods to identify groups or, in some cases, individuals who are likely to become the victims of crime [64].

2.2 Socio-economic deprivation and financial inclusion
Being able to accurately measure and monitor key sociodemographic and economic indicators is critical to design and implement public policies [68]. For
example, the geographic distribution of poverty and wealth is used by governments to make decisions about how to allocate scarce resources and provides a
foundation for the study of the determinants of economic growth [33, 43]. The
quantity and quality of economic data available have significantly improved
in recent years. However, the scarcity of reliable key measures in developing countries represents a major challenge to researchers and policy-makers1 ,
thus hampering efforts to target interventions effectively to areas of greatest need (e.g. African countries) [26, 40]. Recently, several researchers have
started to use mobile phone data [8, 49, 76], social media [88] and satellite
imagery [39] to infer the poverty and wealth of individual subscribers, as well
as to create high-resolution maps of the geographic distribution of wealth
and deprivation.
The use of novel sources of behavioral data and algorithmic decisionmaking processes is also playing a growing role in the area of financial services,
for example credit scoring. Credit scoring is a widely used tool in the financial
sector to compute the risks of lending to potential credit customers. Providing
1

http://www.undatarevolution.org/report/

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

7

information about the ability of customers to pay back their debts or conversely to default, credit scores have become a key variable to build financial
models of customers. Thus, as lenders have moved from traditional interviewbased decisions to data-driven models to assess credit risk, consumer lending
and credit scoring have become increasingly sophisticated. Automated credit
scoring has become a standard input into the pricing of mortgages, auto
loans, and unsecured credit. However, this approach is mainly based on the
past financial history of customers (people or businesses) [81], and thus not
adequate to provide credit access to people or businesses when no financial
history is available. Therefore, researchers and companies are investigating
novel sources of data to replace or to improve traditional credit scores, potentially opening credit access to individuals or businesses that traditionally
have had poor or no access to mainstream financial services –e.g. people who
are unbanked or underbanked, new immigrants, graduating students, etc.
Researchers have leveraged mobility patterns from credit card transactions
[73] and mobility and communication patterns from mobile phones to automatically build user models of spending behavior [74] and propensity to
credit defaults [71, 73]. The use of mobile phone, social media, and browsing
data for financial risk assessment has also attracted the attention of several
entrepreneurial efforts, such as Cignifi2 , Lenddo3 , InVenture4 , and ZestFinance5 .

2.3 Public health
The characterization of individuals and entire populations’ mobility is of
paramount importance for public health [57]: for example, it is key to predict
the spatial and temporal risk of diseases [35, 82, 94], to quantify exposure to
air pollution [48], to understand human migrations after natural disasters or
emergency situations [4, 50], etc. The traditional approach has been based on
household surveys and information provided from census data. These methods suffer from recall bias and limitations in the size of the population sample,
mainly due to excessive costs in the acquisition of the data. Moreover, survey
or census data provide a snapshot of the population dynamics at a given
moment in time. However, it is fundamental to monitor mobility patterns in
a continuous manner, in particular during emergencies in order to support
decision making or assess the impact of government measures.
Tizzoni et al. [82] and Wesolowski et al. [95] have compared traditional
mobility surveys with the information provided by mobile phone data (Call
2
3
4
5

http://cignifi.com/
https://www.lenddo.com/
http://tala.co/
https://www.zestfinance.com/

8

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

Detail Records or CDRs), specifically to model the spread of diseases. The
findings of these works recommend the use of mobile phone data, by themselves or in combination with traditional sources, in particular in low-income
economies where the availability of surveys is highly limited.
Another important area of opportunity within public health is mental
health. Mental health problems are recognized to be a major public health
issue6 . However, the traditional model of episodic care is suboptimal to prevent mental health outcomes and improve chronic disease outcomes. In order
to assess human behavior in the context of mental wellbeing, the standard
clinical practice relies on periodic self-reports that suffer from subjectivity
and memory biases, and are likely influenced by the current mood state.
Moreover, individuals with mental conditions typically visit doctors when
the crisis has already happened and thus report limited information about
precursors useful to prevent the crisis onset. These novel sources of behavioral data yield the possibility of monitoring mental health-related behaviors
and symptoms outside of clinical settings and without having to depend on
self-reported information [52]. For example, several studies have shown that
behavioral data collected through mobile phones and social media can be
exploited to recognize bipolar disorders [20, 30, 59], mood [47], personality
[25, 46] and stress [9].
Table 2 summarizes the main points emerging from the literture reviewed
in this section.
Table 2 Summary table for the literature discussed in Section 2.
Key Area

Problems Tackled
Criminal behavior profiling
Predictive Policing Crime hotspot prediction
Perpetrator(s)/victim(s) identification
Wealth & deprivation mapping
Finance & Economy Spending behavior profiling
Credit scoring
Epidemiologic studies
Public Health
Environment and emergency mapping
Mental Health

References
[67, 72, 91]
[10, 11, 32, 85]
[64]
[8, 49, 39, 76, 88]
[74]
[71, 73]
[35, 82, 94]
[4, 48, 50]
[9, 20, 25, 30, 46, 47, 52, 59]

3 The dark side of data-driven decision-making for
social good
The potential positive impact of big data and machine learning-based approaches to decision-making is huge. However, several researchers and ex6

http://www.who.int/topics/mental_health/en/

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

9

perts [3, 19, 61, 79, 86] have underlined what we refer to as the dark side
of data-driven decision-making, including violations of privacy, information
asymmetry, lack of transparency, discrimination and social exclusion. In this
section we turn our attention to these elements before outlining three key
requirements that would be necessary in order to realize the positive impact, while minimizing the potential negative consequences of data-driven
decision-making in the context of social good.

3.1 Computational violations of privacy
Reports and studies [66] have focused on the misuse of personal data disclosed by users and on the aggregation of data from different sources by
entities playing as data brokers with direct implications in privacy. An often
overlooked element is that the computational developments coupled with the
availability of novel sources of behavioral data (e.g. social media data, mobile
phone data, etc.) now allow inferences about private information that may
never have been disclosed. This element is essential to understand the issues
raised by these algorithmic approaches.
A recent study by Kosinski et al. [42] combined data on Facebook “Likes”
and limited survey information to accurately predict a male user’s sexual orientation, ethnic origin, religious and political preferences, as well as alcohol,
drugs, and cigarettes use. Moreover, Twitter data has recently been used to
identify people with a high likelihood of falling into depression before the
onset of the clinical symptoms [20].
It has also been shown that, despite the algorithmic advancements in
anonymizing data, it is feasible to infer identities from anonymized human
behavioral data, particularly when combined with information derived from
additional sources. For example, Zang et al. [98] have reported that if home
and work addresses were available for some users, up to 35% of users of the
mobile network could be de-identified just using the two most visited towers, likely to be related to their home and work location. More recently, de
Montjoye et al. [22, 23] have demonstrated how unique mobility and shopping behaviors are for each individual. Specifically, they have shown that
four spatio-temporal points are enough to uniquely identify 95% of people in
a mobile phone database of 1.5M people and to identify 90% of people in a
credit card database of 1M people.

3.2 Information asymmetry and lack of transparency
Both governments and companies use data-driven algorithms for decision
making and optimization. Thus, accountability in government and corporate

10

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

use of such decision making tools is fundamental in both validating their
utility toward the public interest as well as redressing harms generated by
these algorithms.
However, the ability to accumulate and manipulate behavioral data about
customers and citizens on an unprecedented scale may give big companies
and intrusive/authoritarian governments powerful means to manipulate segments of the population through targeted marketing efforts and social control
strategies. In particular, we might witness an information asymmetry situation where a powerful few have access and use knowledge that the majority
do not have access to, thus leading to an –or exacerbating the existing– asymmetry of power between the state or the big companies on one side and the
people on the other side [1]. In addition, the nature and the use of various
data-driven algorithms for social good, as well as the lack of computational
or data literacy among citizens, makes algorithmic transparency difficult to
generalize and accountability difficult to assess [61].
Burrell [12] has provided a useful framework to characterize three different types of opacity in algorithmic decision-making: (1) intentional opacity,
whose objective is the protection of the intellectual property of the inventors
of the algorithms. This type of opacity could be mitigated with legislation
that would force decision-makers towards the use of open source systems.
The new General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) in the EU with a
“right to an explanation” starting in 2018 is an example of such legislation7 .
However, there are clear corporate and governmental interests in favor of intentional opacity which make it difficult to eliminate this type of opacity; (2)
illiterate opacity, due to the fact that the vast majority of people lack the
technical skills to understand the underpinnings of algorithms and machine
learning models built from data. This kind of opacity might be attenuated
with stronger education programs in computational thinking and by enabling
that independent experts advice those affected by algorithm decision-making;
and (3) intrinsic opacity, which arises by the nature of certain machine learning methods that are difficult to interpret (e.g. deep learning models). This
opacity is well known in the machine learning community (usually referred
to as the interpretability problem). The main approach to combat this type
of opacity requires using alternative machine learning models that are easy
to interpret by humans, despite the fact that they might yield lower accuracy
than black-box non-interpretable models.
Fortunately, there is increasing awareness of the importance of reducing
or eliminating the opacity of data-driven algorithmic decision-making systems. There are a number of research efforts and initiatives in this direction,
including the Data Transparency Lab8 which is a “community of technolo7

Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April
2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data
Protection Regulation) http://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
8

http://www.datatransparencylab.org/

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

11

gists, researchers, policymakers and industry representatives working to advance online personal data transparency through research and design”, and
the DARPA Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) project9 . A tutorial
on the subject has been held at the 2016 ACM Knowledge and Data Discovery conference [38]. Researchers from New York University’s Information
Law Institute, such as Helen Nissenbaum and Solon Barocas, and Microsoft
Research, such as Kate Crawford and Tarleton Gillespie, have held several
workshops and conferences during the past few years on the ethical and legal challenges related to algorithmic governance and decision-making.10 A
nominee for the National Book Award, Cathy O’Neil’s book, “Weapons of
Math Destruction,” details several case studies on harms and risks to public
accountability associated with big data-driven algorithmic decision-making,
particularly in the areas of criminal justice and education [58]. Recently, in
partnership with Microsoft Research and others, the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy has co-hosted several public symposiums on
the impacts and challenges of algorithms and artificial intelligence, specifically in social inequality, labor, healthcare and ethics.11

3.3 Social exclusion and discrimination
From a legal perspective, Tobler [83] argued that discrimination derives from
“the application of different rules or practices to comparable situations, or of
the same rule or practice to different situations”. In a recent paper, Barocas
and Selbst [3] elaborate that discrimination may be an artifact of the data
collection and analysis process itself; more specifically, even with the best
intentions, data-driven algorithmic decision-making can lead to discriminatory practices and outcomes. Algorithmic decision procedures can reproduce
existing patterns of discrimination, inherit the prejudice of prior decision
makers, or simply reflect the widespread biases that persist in society [19]. It
can even have the perverse result of exacerbating existing inequalities by suggesting that historically disadvantaged groups actually deserve less favorable
treatment [58].
Discrimination from algorithms can occur for several reasons. First, input
data into algorithmic decisions may be poorly weighted, leading to disparate
impact; for example, as a form of indirect discrimination, overemphasis of
zip code within predictive policing algorithms can lead to the association of
low-income African-American neighborhoods with areas of crime and as a
result, the application of specific targeting based on group membership [17].
Second, discrimination can occur from the decision to use an algorithm itself.
9

http://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-artificial-intelligence
http://www.law.nyu.edu/centers/ili/algorithmsconference
11 https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/05/03/preparing-future-artificial-intelligence
10

12

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

Categorization – through algorithmic classification, prioritization, association
and filtering – can be considered as a form of direct discrimination, whereby
algorithms are used for disparate treatment [27]. Third, algorithms can lead to
discrimination as a result of the misuse of certain models in different contexts
[14]. Fourth, in a form of feedback loop, biased training data can be used both
as evidence for the use of algorithms and as proof of their effectiveness [14].
The use of algorithmic data-driven decision processes may also result in
individuals mistakenly being denied opportunities based not on their own
action but on the actions of others with whom they share some characteristics.
For example, some credit card companies have lowered a customer’s credit
limit, not based on the customer’s payment history, but rather based on
analysis of other customers with a poor repayment history that had shopped
at the same establishments where the customer had shopped [66].
Indeed, we find increasing evidence of detrimental impact already taking
place in current non-algorithmic approaches to credit scoring and generally
to backgrounds checks. The latter have been widely used in recent years
in several contexts: it is common to agree to be subjected to background
checks when applying for a job, to lease a new apartment, etc. In fact, hundreds of thousands of people have unknowingly seen themselves adversely
affected on existential matters such as job opportunities and housing availability due to simple but common mistakes (for instance, misidentification) in
the procedures used by external companies to perform background checks12 .
It is worth noticing that the trivial procedural mistakes causing such adverse outcomes are bound to disappear once fully replaced with data-driven
methodologies. Alas, this also means that should such methodologies not be
transparent in their inner workings, the effects are likely to stay though with
different roots. Further, the effort required to identify the causes of unfair
and discriminative outcomes can be expected to be exponentially larger, as
exponentially more complex will be the black-box models employed to assist in the decision-making process. This scenario highlights particularly well
the need for machine learning models featuring transparency and accountability: adopting black-box approaches in scenarios where the lives of people
would be seriously affected by a machine-driven decision could lead to forms
of algorithmic stigma 13 , a particularly creepy scenario considering that those
stigmatized might never become aware of being so, and the stigmatizer will be
an unaccountable machine. Recent advances in neural network-based (deep
learning) models are yielding unprecedented accuracies in a variety of fields.
However, such models tend to be difficult – if not impossible – to interpret, as
12
See,
for
instance,
http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/
ct-background-check-penalties-1030-biz-20151029-story.html
13 As a social phenomenon, the concept of stigma has received significant attention by sociologists, who under different frames highlighted and categorized the various factors leading
individuals or groups to be discriminated by society, the countermoves often adopted by
the stigmatized, and analyzed dynamics of reactions and evolution of stigma. We refer the
interested reader to the review provided by Major and O’Brian [51].

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

13

previously explained. In this chapter, we highlight the need for data-driven
machine learning models that are interpretable by humans when such models
are going to be used to make decisions that affect individuals or groups of
individuals.

4 Requirements for positive disruption of data-driven
policies
As noted in the previous sections, both governments and companies are increasingly using data-driven algorithms for decision support and resource
optimization. In the context of social good, accountability in the use of such
powerful decision support tools is fundamental in both validating their utility
toward the public interest as well as redressing corrupt or unjust harms generated by these algorithms. Several scholars have emphasized elements of what
we refer to as the dark side of data-driven policies for social good, including
violations of individual and group privacy, information asymmetry, lack of
transparency, social exclusion and discrimination. Arguments against the use
of social good algorithms typically call into question the use of machines in
decision support and the need to protect the role of human decision-making.
However, therein lies a huge potential and imperative for leveraging large
scale human behavioral data to design and implement policies that would
help improve the lives of millions of people. Recent debates have focused
on characterizing data-driven policies as either “good” or “bad” for society.
We focus instead on the potential of data-driven policies to lead to positive
disruption, such that they reinforce and enable the powerful functions of
algorithms as tools generating value while minimizing their dark side.
In this section, we present key human-centric requirements for positive disruption, including a fundamental renegotiation of user-centric data ownership
and management, the development of tools and participatory infrastructures
towards increased algorithmic transparency and accountability, and the creation of living labs for experimenting and co-creating data-driven policies.
We place humans at the center of our discussion as humans are ultimately
both the actors and the subjects of the decisions made via algorithmic means.
If we are able to ensure that these requirements are met, we should be able
to realize the positive potential of data-driven algorithmic decision-making
while minimizing the risks and possible negative unintended consequences.

4.1 User-centric data ownership and management
A big question on the table for policy-makers, researchers, and intellectuals
is: how do we unlock the value of human behavioral data while preserving

14

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

the fundamental right to privacy? This question implicitly recognizes the
risks, in terms not only of possible abuses but also of a “missed chance for
innovation”, inherent to the current paradigm: the dominant siloed approach
to data collection, management, and exploitation, precludes participation to
a wide range of actors, most notably to the very producers of personal data
(i.e. the users).
On this matter, new user-centric models for personal data management
have been proposed, in order to empower individuals with more control of
their own data’s life-cycle [63]. To this end, researchers and companies are
developing repositories which implement medium-grained access control to
different kinds of personally identifiable information (PII), such as passwords,
social security numbers and health data [92], location [24] and personal data
collected by means of smartphones or connected devices [24]. A pillar of
these approaches is represented by a Personal Data Eco-system, composed
by secure vaults of personal data whose owners are granted full control of.
Along this line, an interesting example is the Enigma platform [101] that
leverages the recent technological trend of decentralization: advances in the
fields of cryptography and decentralized computer networks have resulted
in the emergence of a novel technology – known as the blockchain – which
has the potential to reduce the role of one of the most important actors in
our society: the middle man [5, 21]. By allowing people to transfer a unique
piece of digital property or data to others, in a safe, secure, and immutable
way, this technology can create digital currencies (e.g. bitcoin) that are not
backed by any governmental body [54]; self-enforcing digital contracts, called
smart contracts, whose execution does not require any human intervention
(e.g. Ethereum) [80]; and decentralized marketplaces that aim to operate
free from regulations [21]. Hence, Enigma tackles the challenge of providing
a secure and trustworthy mechanism for the exchange of goods in a personal
data market. To illustrate how the platform works, consider the following
example: a group of data analysts of an insurance company wishes to test
a model that leverages people’s mobile phone data. Instead of sharing their
raw data with the data analysts in the insurance company, the users can
securely store their data in Enigma, and only provide the data analysts with
a permission to execute their study. The data analysts are thus able to execute
their code and obtain the results, but nothing else. In the process, the users
are compensated for having given access to their data and the computers in
the network are paid for their computing resources [78].

4.2 Algorithmic transparency and accountability
The deployment of a machine learning model entails a degree of trust on how
satisfactory its performance in the wild will be from the perspectives of both
the builders and the users. Such trust is assessed at several points during

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

15

an iterative model building process. Nonetheless, many of the state-of-theart machine learning-based models (e.g. neural networks) act as black-boxes
once deployed. When such models are used for decision-making, the lack of
explanations regarding why and how they have reached their decisions poses
several concerns. In order to address this limitation, recent research efforts in
the machine learning community have proposed different approaches to make
the algorithms more amenable to ex ante and ex post inspection. For example,
a number of studies have attempted to tackle the issue of discrimination
within algorithms by introducing tools to both identify [6] and rectify [13,
6, 31] cases of unwanted bias. Recently, Ribeiro et al. [69] have proposed a
model-agnostic method to derive explanations for the predictions of a given
model.
An interesting ongoing initiative is the Open Algorithms (OPAL) project
14
, a multi-partner effort led by Orange, the MIT Media Lab, Data-Pop Alliance, Imperial College London, and the World Economic Forum, that aims
to open -without exposing- data collected and stored by private companies
by “sending the code to the data” rather than the other way around. The
goal is to enable the design, implementation and monitoring of development
policies and programs, accountability of government action, and citizen engagement while leveraging the availability of large scale human behavioral
data. OPAL’s core will consist of an open platform allowing open algorithms
to run on the servers of partner companies, behind their firewalls, to extract
key development indicators and operational data of relevance for a wide range
of potential users. Requests for approved, certified and pre-determined indicators by third parties –e.g. mobility matrices, poverty maps, population
densities– will be sent to them via the platform; certified algorithms will run
on the data in a multiple privacy-preserving manner, and results will be made
available via an API. The platform will also be used to foster civic engagement of a broad range of social constituents –academic institutions, private
sector companies, official institutions, non-governmental and civil society organizations. Overall, the OPAL initiative has three key objectives: (i) engage
with data providers, users, and analysts at all the stages of algorithm development; (ii) contribute to building local capacities and help shaping the future
technological, ethical and legal frameworks that will govern the collection,
control and use of human behavioral data to foster social progress; and (iii)
build data literacy among users and partners, conceptualized as “the ability
to constructively engage in society through and about data”. Initiatives such
as OPAL have the potential to enable more human-centric accountable and
transparent data-driven decision-making and governance.
14

http://datapopalliance.org/open-algorithms-a-new-paradigm-for-using-private-data-for-social-good/

16

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

4.3 Living labs to experiment data-driven policies
The use of real-time human behavioral data to design and implement policies
has been traditionally outside the scope of the way of working in policy making. However, the potential of this type of data will only be realized when
policy makers are able to analyze the data, to study human behavior and to
test policies in the real world. A possible way is to build living laboratories
-communities of volunteers willing to try new ways of doing things in a natural setting- in order to test ideas and hypotheses in a real life setting. An
example is the Mobile Territorial Lab (MTL), a living lab launched by Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Telecom Italia, the MIT Media Lab and Telefonica,
that has been observing the lives of more than 100 families through multiple
channels for more than three years [15]. Data from multiple sources, including smartphones, questionnaires, experience sampling probes, etc. has been
collected and used to create a multi-layered view of the lives of the study
participants. In particular, social interactions (e.g. call and SMS communications), mobility routines and spending patterns, etc. have been captured. One
of the MTL goals is to devise new ways of sharing personal data by means of
Personal Data Store (PDS) technologies, in order to promote greater civic engagement. An example of an application enabled by PDS technologies is the
sharing of best practices among families with young children. How do other
families spend their money? How much do they get out and socialize? Once
the individual gives permission, MyDataStore [89], the PDS system used by
MTL participants, allows such personal data to be collected, anonymized,
and shared with other young families safely and automatically.
The MTL has been also used to investigate how to deal with the sensitivities of collecting and using deeply personal data in real-world situations. In
particular, a MTL study investigated the perceived monetary value of mobile
information and its association with behavioral characteristics and demographics; the results corroborate the arguments towards giving back to the
people (users, citizens, according to the scenario) control on the data they
constantly produce [77].
Along these lines, Data-Pop Alliance and the MIT Media Lab launched in
May 2016 a novel initiative called “Laboratorio Urbano” in Bogotá, Colombia, in partnership with Bogotá’s city government and Chamber of Commerce. The main objective of the Bogotá Urban Laboratory is to contribute
to the city’s urban vitality, with a focus on mobility and safety, through
collaborative research projects and dialogues involving the public and private sectors, academic institutions, and citizens. Similar initiatives are being
planned in other major cities of the global south, including Dakar, Senegal,
with the goal of strengthening and connecting local ecosystems where datadriven innovations can take place and scale.
Figure 1 provides the readers with a visual representation of the factors
playing a significant role in positive data-driven disruption.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

17

Fig. 1 Requirements summary for positive data-driven disruption.

5 Conclusion
In this chapter we have provided an overview of both the opportunities and
the risks of data-driven algorithmic decision-making for the public good. We
are witnessing an unprecedented time in our history, where vast amounts of
fine grained human behavioral data are available. The analysis of this data
has the impact to help inform policies in public health, disaster management,
safety, economic development and national statistics among others. In fact,
the use of data is at the core of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
defined by United Nations, both in order to achieve the goals and to measure
progress towards their achievement.
While this is an exciting time for researchers and practitioners in this
new field of computational social sciences, we need to be aware of the risks
associated with these new approaches to decision making, including violation
of privacy, lack of transparency, information asymmetry, social exclusion and
discrimination. We have proposed three human-centric requirements that we
consider to be of paramount importance in order to enable positive disruption
of data-driven policy-making: user-centric data ownership and management;
algorithmic transparency and accountability; and living labs to experiment
with data-driven policies in the wild. It will be only when we honor these
requirements that we will be able to move from the feared tyranny of data
and algorithms to a data-enabled model of democratic governance running
against tyrants and autocrats, and for the people.

18

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

References
1. G.A. Akerlof. The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488–500, 1970.
2. G.A. Akerlof and R.J. Shiller. Animal spirits: How human psychology drives the
economy, and why it matters for global capitalism. Princeton University Press, 2009.
3. S. Barocas and A.D. Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. California Law Review,
104:671–732, 2016.
4. L. Bengtsson, X. Lu, A. Thorson, R. Garfield, and J. Von Schreeb. Improved response
to disasters and outbreaks by tracking population movements with mobile phone
network data: a post-earthquake geospatial study in haiti. PloS Medicine, 8(8), 2011.
5. Y. Benkler. The wealth of networks. Yale University Press, New Haven, 2006.
6. B. Berendt and S. Preibusch.
Better decision support through exploratory
discrimination-aware data mining: Foundations and empirical evidence. Artificial
Intelligence and Law, 22(2):1572–8382, 2014.
7. V. D. Blondel, A. Decuyper, and G. Krings. A survey of results on mobile phone
datasets analysis. EPJ Data Science, 4(10), 2015.
8. J. Blumenstock, G. Cadamuro, and R. On. Predicting poverty and wealth from
mobile phone metadata. Science, 350(6264):1073–1076, 2015.
9. A. Bogomolov, B. Lepri, M. Ferron, F. Pianesi, and A. Pentland. Daily stress recognition from mobile phone data, weather conditions and individual traits. In Proceedings
of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pages 477–486. 2014.
10. A. Bogomolov, B. Lepri, J. Staiano, E. Letouzé, N. Oliver, F. Pianesi, and A. Pentland. Moves on the street: Classifying crime hotspots using aggregated anonymized
data on people dynamics. Big Data, 3(3):148–158, 2015.
11. A. Bogomolov, B. Lepri, J. Staiano, N. Oliver, F. Pianesi, and A. Pentland. Once upon
a crime: Towards crime prediction from demographics and mobile data. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI), pages 427–434,
2014.
12. J. Burrell. How the machine ‘thinks’: Understanding opacity in machine learning
algorithms. Big Data & Society, 3(1), 2016.
13. T. Calders and S. Verwer. Three naive bayes approaches for discrimination-free
classification. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 21(2):277–292, 2010.
14. T. Calders and I. Zliobaite. Why unbiased computational processes can lead to
discriminative decision procedures. In B. Custers, T. Calders, B. Schermer, and
T. Zarsky, editors, Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society, pages
43–57. 2013.
15. S. Centellegher, M. De Nadai, M. Caraviello, C. Leonardi, M. Vescovi, Y. Ramadian,
N. Oliver, F. Pianesi, A. Pentland, F. Antonelli, and B. Lepri. The mobile territorial
lab: A multilayered and dynamic view on parents daily lives. EPJ Data Science, 5(3),
2016.
16. S.P. Chainey, L. Tompson, and S. Uhlig. The utility of hotspot mapping for predicting
spatial patterns of crime. Security Journal, 21:4–28, 2008.
17. A. Christin, A. Rosenblatt, and d. boyd. Courts and predictive algorithms. Data &
Civil Rights Primer, 2015.
18. D.K. Citron and F. Pasquale. The scored society. Washington Law Review, 89(1):1–
33, 2014.
19. K. Crawford and J. Schultz. Big data and due process: Toward a framework to redress
predictive privacy harms. Boston College Law Review, 55(1):93–128, 2014.
20. M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, , and E. Horvitz. Predicting depression via
social media. In Proceedings of the 7th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs
and Social Media, 2013.
21. P. De Filippi. The interplay between decentralization and privacy: The case of
blockchain technologies. Journal of Peer Production, 7, 2015.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

19

22. Y.-A. de Montjoye, C. Hidalgo, M. Verleysen, and V. Blondel. Unique in the crowd:
The privacy bounds of human mobility. Scientific Reports, 3, 2013.
23. Y.-A. de Montjoye, L. Radaelli, V.K. Singh, and A. Pentland. Unique in the shopping
mall: On the re-identifiability of credit card metadata. Science, 347(6221):536–539,
2015.
24. Y.-A. de Montjoye, E. Shmueli, S. Wang, and A. Pentland. Openpds: Protecting the
privacy of metadata through safeanswers. PloS One, (10.1371), 2014.
25. R. de Oliveira, A. Karatzoglou, P. Concejero Cerezo, A. Armenta Lopez de Vicuña,
and N. Oliver. Towards a psychographic user model from mobile phone usage. In
CHI’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 2191–
2196. ACM, 2011.
26. S. Devarajan. Africa’s statistical tragedy. Review of Income and Wealth, 59(S1):S9–
S15, 2013.
27. N. Diakopoulos. Algorithmic accountability: Journalistic investigation of computational power structures. Digital Journalism, 2015.
28. W. Easterly. The Tyranny of Experts. Basic Books, 2014.
29. J. Eck, S. Chainey, J. Cameron, and R. Wilson. Mapping crime: understanding
hotspots. National Institute of Justice: Washington DC, 2005.
30. M. Faurholt-Jepsena, M. Frostb, M. Vinberga, E.M. Christensena, J.E. Bardram, and
L.V. Kessinga. Smartphone data as objective measures of bipolar disorder symptoms.
Psychiatry Research, 217:124–127, 2014.
31. M. Feldman, S.A. Friedler, J. Moeller, C. Scheidegger, and S. Venkatasubramanian.
Certifying and removing disparate impact. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 259–268,
2015.
32. A.G. Ferguson. Crime mapping and the fourth amendment: Redrawing high-crime
areas. Hastings Law Journal, 63:179–232, 2012.
33. G. Fields. Changes in poverty and inequality. World Bank Research Observer, 4:167–
186, 1989.
34. S.T. Fiske. Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D.T. Gilbert, S.T. Fiske,
and G. Lindzey, editors, Handbook of Social Psychology, pages 357–411. Boston:
McGraw-Hill, 1998.
35. E. Frias-Martinez, G. Williamson, and V. Frias-Martinez. An agent-based model
of epidemic spread using human mobility and social network information. In Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011 International Conference on, pages 57–64. IEEE,
2011.
36. T. Gillespie. The relevance of algorithms. In T. Gillespie, P. Boczkowski, and
K. Foot, editors, Media technologies: Essays on communication, materiality, and
society, pages 167–193. MIT Press, 2014.
37. J. Ginsberg, M.H. Mohebbi, R.S. Patel, L. rammer, M.S. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant.
Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature, 457:1012–1014,
2009.
38. Sara Hajian, Francesco Bonchi, and Carlos Castillo. Algorithmic bias: From discrimination discovery to fairness-aware data mining. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
2125–2126. ACM, 2016.
39. N. Jean, M. Burke, M. Xie, W.M. Davis, D.B. Lobell, and S. Ermon. Combining
satellite imagery and machine learning to predict poverty. Science, 353(6301):790–
794, 2016.
40. M. Jerven. Poor numbers: How we are misled by african development statistics and
what to do about it. Cornell University Press, 2013.
41. G. King. Ensuring the data-rich future of the social sciences. Science, 2011.
42. M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell, and T. Graepel. Private traits and attributes are predictable
from digital records of human behavior. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 110(15):5802–5805, 2013.

20

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

43. S. Kuznets. Economic growth and income inequality. American Economic Review,
45:1–28, 1955.
44. M. Latzer, K. Hollnbuchner, N. Just, and F. Saurwein. The economics of algorithmic
selection on the internet. In J. Bauer and M. Latzer, editors, Handbook on the
Economics of the Internet. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, Northampton, 2015.
45. D. Lazer, A. Pentland, L. Adamic, S. Aral, A-L. Barabasi, D. Brewer, N. Christakis,
N. Contractor, J. Fowler, M. Gutmann, T. Jebara, G. King, M. Macy, D. Roy, and
M. Van Alstyne. Computational social science. Science, 323(5915):721–723, 2009.
46. B. Lepri, J. Staiano, E. Shmueli, F. Pianesi, and A. Pentland. The role of personality
in shaping social networks and mediating behavioral change. User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, 26(2):143–175, 2016.
47. R. LiKamWa, Y. Liu, N.D. Lane, and L. Zhong. Moodscope: Building a mood sensor
from smartphone usage patterns. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Service (MobiSys), pages 389–402.
2013.
48. H.Y. Liu, E. Skjetne, and M. Kobernus. Mobile phone tracking: In support of modelling traffic-related air pollution contribution to individual exposure and its implications for public health impact assessment. Environmental Health, 12, 2013.
49. T. Louail, M. Lenormand, O. G. Cantu Ros, M. Picornell, R. Herranz, E. FriasMartinez, J. J. Ramasco, and M. Barthelemy. From mobile phone data to the spatial
structure of cities. Scientific Reports, 4(5276), Jun 2014.
50. X. Lu, L. Bengtsson, and P. Holme. Predictability of population displacement after the 2010 haiti earthquake. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
109:11576–81, 2012.
51. B. Major and L.T. O’Brien. The social psychology of stigma. Annual Review of
Psychology, 56:393–421, 2005.
52. A. Matic and N. Oliver. The untapped opportunity of mobile network data for mental
health. In Future of Pervasive Health Workshop. ACM, 6 2016.
53. G.O. Mohler, M.B. Short, P.J. Brantingham, F.P. Schoenberg, and G.E. Tita. Selfexciting point process modeling of crime. Journal of the American Statistical Association, (106):100–108, 2011.
54. S. Nakamoto. Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Technical report, Kent
University, 2009.
55. F. Ofli, P. Meier, M. Imran, C. Castillo, D. Tuia, N. Rey, J. Briant, P. Millet, F. Reinhard, M. Parkan, and S. Joost. Combining human computing and machine learning
to make sense of big (aerial) data for disaster response. Big Data, 4:47–59, 2016.
56. P. Ohm. Broken promises of privacy: Responding to the surprising failure of
anonymization. UCLA Law Review, 57:1701–1777, 2010.
57. N. Oliver, A. Matic, and E. Frias-Martinez. Mobile network data for public health:
Opportunities and challenges. Frontiers in Public Health, 3:189, 2015.
58. C. O’Neil. Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and
threatens democracy. Crown, 2016.
59. V. Osmani, A. Gruenerbl, G. Bahle, Lukowicz P. Haring, C., and Mayora O. Smartphones in mental health: Detecting depressive and manic episodes. IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 14(3):10–13, 2015.
60. D. Pager and H. Shepherd. The sociology of discrimination: Racial discrimination
in employment, housing, credit and consumer market. Annual Review of Sociology,
34:181–209, 2008.
61. F. Pasquale. The Black Blox Society: The secret algorithms that control money and
information. Harvard University Press, 2015.
62. D. Pastor-Escuredo, Y. Torres Fernandez, J.M. Bauer, A. Wadhwa, C. Castro-Correa,
L. Romanoff, J.G. Lee, A. Rutherford, V. Frias-Martinez, N. Oliver, Frias-Martinez
E., and M. Luengo-Oroz. Flooding through the lens of mobile phone activity. In
IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference, GHTC’14. IEEE, 2014.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

21

63. A. Pentland. Society’s nervous system: Building effective government, energy, and
public health systems. IEEE Computer, 45(1):31–38, 2012.
64. W.L. Perry, B. McInnis, C.C. Price, S.C. Smith, and J.S. Hollywood. Predictive policing: The role of crime forecasting in law enforcment operations. Rand Corporation,
2013.
65. J. Podesta, P. Pritzker, E.J. Moniz, J. Holdren, and J. Zients. Big data: Seizing
opportunities, preserving values. Technical report, Executive Office of the President,
2014.
66. E. Ramirez, J. Brill, M.K. Ohlhausen, and T. McSweeny. Big data: A tool for inclusion
or exclusion? Technical report, Federal Trade Commission, January 2016.
67. J.H. Ratcliffe. A temporal constraint theory to explain opportunity-based spatial
offending patterns. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 43(3):261–291,
2006.
68. M. Ravallion. The economics of poverty: History, measurement, and policy. Oxford
University Press, 2016.
69. M.T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin. ”why should I trust you?”: Explaining the
predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, CA, USA,
August 13-17, 2016, pages 1135–1144, 2016.
70. W. Samuelson and R. Zeckhauser. Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty, (1):7–59, 1988.
71. J. San Pedro, D. Proserpio, and N. Oliver. Mobiscore: Towards universal credit
scoring from mobile phone data. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP), pages 195–207, 2015.
72. M. B. Short, M. R. D’Orsogna, V. B. Pasour, G. E. Tita, P. J. Brantingham, A. L.
Bertozzi, and L. B. Chayes. A statistical model of criminal behavior. Mathematical
Models and Methods in Applied Sciences, 18(supp01):1249–1267, 2008.
73. V. K. Singh, B. Bozkaya, and A. Pentland. Money walks: Implicit mobility behavior
and financial well-being. PLOS ONE, 10(8):e0136628, 2015.
74. V.K. Singh, L. Freeman, B. Lepri, and A. Pentland. Predicting spending behavior
using socio-mobile features. In Social Computing (SocialCom), 2013 International
Conference on, pages 174–179. IEEE, 2013.
75. C. Smith-Clarke, A. Mashhadi, and L. Capra. Poverty on the cheap: Estimating
poverty maps using aggregated mobile communication networks. In Proceedings of
the 32nd ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI2014),
2014.
76. V. Soto, V. Frias-Martinez, J. Virseda, and E. Frias-Martinez. Prediction of socioeconomic levels using cell phone records. In Proceedings of the International conference
on UMAP, pages 377–388, 2011.
77. J. Staiano, N. Oliver, B. Lepri, R. de Oliveira, M. Caraviello, and N. Sebe. Money
walks: a human-centric study on the economics of personal mobile data. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing, pages 583–594. ACM, 2014.
78. J. Staiano, G. Zyskind, B. Lepri, N. Oliver, and A. Pentland. The rise of decentralized personal data markets. In D. Shrier and A. Pentland, editors, Trust::Data: A
New Framework for Identity and Data Sharing. CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2016.
79. L. Sweeney.
Discrimination in online ad delivery.
Available at SSRN:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2208240, 2013.
80. N. Szabo. Formalizing and securing relationships on public networks. First Monday,
2(9), 1997.
81. L. Thomas. Consumer credit models: Pricing, profit, and portfolios. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2009.

22

Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length

82. M. Tizzoni, P. Bajardi, A. Decuyper, G. Kon Kam King, C.M. Schneider, V. Blondel,
Z. Smoreda, M.C. Gonzalez, and V. Colizza. On the use of human mobility proxies
for modeling epidemics. PLoS Computational Biology, 10(7), 2014.
83. C. Tobler. Limits and potential of the concept of indirect discrimination. Technical
report, European Network of Legal Experts in Anti-Discrimination, 2008.
84. J.L. Toole, N. Eagle, and J.B. Plotkin. Spatiotemporal correlations in criminal offense
records. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2(4):38:1–38:18,
July 2011.
85. M. Traunmueller, G. Quattrone, and L. Capra. Mining mobile phone data to investigate urban crime theories at scale. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Social Informatics, pages 396–411, 2014.
86. Z. Tufekci. Algorithmic harms beyond facebook and google: Emergent challenges of
computational agency. Colorado Technology Law Journal, 13:203–218, 2015.
87. A. Tverksy and D. Kahnemann. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases.
Science, 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974.
88. A. Venerandi, G. Quattrone, L. Capra, D. Quercia, and D. Saez-Trumper. Measuring urban deprivation from user generated content. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing
(CSCW2015), 2015.
89. M. Vescovi, C. Perentis, C. Leonardi, B. Lepri, and C. Moiso. My data store: Toward user awareness and control on personal data. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct
Publication, pages 179–182, 2014.
90. H. Wang, Z. Li, D. Kifer, and C. Graif. Crime rate inference with big data. In
Proceedings of International conference on KDD, 2016.
91. T. Wang, C. Rudin, D. Wagner, and R. Sevieri. Learning to detect patterns of
crime. In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pages 515–530.
Springer, 2013.
92. R. Want, T. Pering, G. Danneels, M. Kumar, M. Sundar, and J. Light. The personal
server: Changing the way we think about ubiquitous computing. In Proceedings of
4th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, pages 194–209, 2002.
93. D. Weisburd. Place-based policing. Ideas in American Policing, 9:1–16, 2008.
94. A. Wesolowski, N. Eagle, A. Tatem, D. Smith, R. Noor, and C. Buckee. Quantifying
the impact of human mobility on malaria. Science, 338(6104):267–270, 2012.
95. A. Wesolowski, G. Stresman, N. Eagle, J. Stevenson, C. Owaga, E. Marube,
T. Bousema, C. Drakeley, J. Cox, and C.O. Buckee. Quantifying travel behavior for
infectious disease research: A comparison of data from surveys and mobile phones.
Scientific Reports, 4, 2014.
96. M. Willson. Algorithms (and the) everyday. Information, Communication & Society,
2016.
97. R. Wilson, E. Erbach-Schoenengerg, M. Albert, D. Power, Tudge S., and Gonzalez M.
et al. Rapid and Near Real-time Assessments of Population Displacement Using
Mobile Phone Data Following Disasters: The 2015 Nepal Earthquake. PLOS Current
Disasters, February 2016.
98. H. Zang and J. Bolot. Anonymization of location data does not work: A large-scale
measurement study. In Proceedings of 17th ACM Annual International Conference
on Mobile Computing and Networking, pages 145–156, 2011.
99. T. Zarsky. The trouble with algorithmic decisions: An analytic road map to examine efficiency and fairness in automated and opaque decision making. Science,
Technology, and Human Values, 41(1):118–132, 2016.
100. T.Z. Zarsky. Automated prediction: Perception, law and policy. Communications of
the ACM, 4:167–186, 1989.
101. G. Zyskind, O. Nathan, and A. Pentland. Decentralizing privacy: Using blockchain to
protect personal data. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy
Workshops, pages 180–184. 2014.

