Body Image 8 (2011) 90–92

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Body Image
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bodyimage

Brief research report

Fat stigmatization on YouTube: A content analysis
Mallory Hussin, Savannah Frazier, J. Kevin Thompson ∗
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33620, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 18 May 2009
Received in revised form
27 September 2010
Accepted 5 October 2010
Key words:
Internet
YouTube
Fat stigmatization
Weight bias
Media exposure
Gender
Ethnicity

a b s t r a c t
YouTube.com is an internet website that is viewed by two billion individuals daily, and thus may serve
as the source of images and messages regarding weight acceptance or weight bias. In the current study,
a targeted sample of YouTube videos that displayed fat stigmatization were content rated on a variety of
video characteristics. The ﬁndings revealed that men were the target of fat stigmatization (62.1%) almost
twice as often as women (36.4%). When there was an antagonist present in the video, the great majority of
the time, the aggressor was male (88.5%) rather than female (7.7%). These ﬁndings indicate that men were
the antagonist 11.5 times the rate of women, but they were only 1.7 times more often stigmatized. Future
research avenues, including an experimental analysis of viewing stigmatizing videos on body image, are
recommended.
© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Society’s veneration of the thin ideal and its devaluation of
overweight and obesity has been referred to as fat stigmatization and weight bias (Himes & Thompson, 2007; King, Hebl, &
Heatherton, 2005; Neumark-Sztainer & Haines, 2004). Over the
past 80 years, while other forms of stigmatization (e.g., racism and
sexism) have greatly diminished (Bobo, 2001; Fiske, 2003), there
is little evidence that fat stigmatization is dwindling (Brownell,
Puhl, Schwartz, & Rudd, 2005). Additionally, one psychosocial indicator of fat stigmatization, negative weight-related commentary
and teasing, has been found to be strongly related to body dissatisfaction (Thompson, Herbozo, Himes, & Yamamiya, 2005) which is
associated with low self-esteem, depression and eating disorders
(Thompson, Heinberg, Altabe, & Tantleff-Dunn, 1999). An understanding of potential sources of fat stigmatization directed toward
overweight or obese individuals may help pinpoint potential inﬂuences that contribute to body dissatisfaction in these individuals
(Thompson et al., 2005).
Research has examined the media’s contribution to the creation of norms and beliefs about weight and the role it plays in
providing a model for individuals engaging in fat stigmatization
(for a review, see Ata & Thompson, 2010). To date research has
focused exclusively on fat stigmatization in movies, television and

∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33620, United States. Tel.: +1 813 974 0367; fax: +1 813 974 4617.
E-mail addresses: Thompson@cas.usf.edu, thompsonjk2003@yahoo.com
(J.K. Thompson).
1740-1445/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bodyim.2010.10.003

magazines. For instance, Fouts and Burggraf (1999) found overweight female characters to be under-represented on television
and low weight female characters to receive more positive comments than overweight female characters. Furthermore, Fouts and
Vaughan (2002) found prime-time television shows to reinforce
prejudiced behavior against women based on weight and size,
while heavy males received little punishment. Latner and Schwartz
(2005) noted evidence of fat stigmatization in children’s movies
and Latner, Rosewall, and Simmonds (2007) found that media use
by children (TV, magazines, videogames) was positively associated
with a more negative view of obese boys and girls. Himes and
Thompson (2007) found male television and movie characters to be
three times more likely to engage in fat commentary than female
characters and the majority of the fat-speciﬁc material was found
to be verbal as opposed to non-verbal.
YouTube.com is used as a video sharing platform by millions
of individuals internationally and, as of May 2010, generated over
2 billion views per day (website-monitoring.com, August 2010).
Most of its viewership occurs between the ages of 18–49 (48%),
but younger and older ages also take advantage of the website
(ages 3–12: 5%; ages 13–17: 21%; ages 50+: 16% (quantcast.com
May, 2010)). In the US, it is primarily viewed by Caucasians (65%),
followed by African Americans (13%), Hispanics (14%), and Asians
(7%) and viewers are equally represented by males and females
(quantcast.com, May 2010).
To date, YouTube.com has not been analyzed for content that
might consist of fat stigmatization. Given the rather dramatic rise
of this form of media exposure and the vast number of videos available along with a very high daily viewership, it seemed possible
that this new media source might be an undocumented reservoir

M. Hussin et al. / Body Image 8 (2011) 90–92

of fat stigmatization. Given the vast number of videos on YouTube,
it would not be possible to analyze all of the potential videos for the
presence of fat stigmatization. Rather, we used a targeted sampling
strategy to get a snapshot of the characteristics of videos that met
speciﬁc criteria indicating that fat stigmatization was evident.

Method
Selection of videos
A targeted sampling approach was utilized to obtain fatspeciﬁc commentary and humor. The word “fat” was searched on
YouTube.com and then the approximately 493,000 results of that
search were sorted by videos that had received the most viewings.
YouTube only gives an approximate number of videos available
because the number is constantly changing. The 50 most viewed
videos containing fat stigmatization (i.e., someone being devalued
based solely on their being overweight or obese) in either the title,
video, comments, or any combination of these were included in
the content analysis. Fat stigma was deemed any form of devaluation due to excessive weight. This could be reﬂected by content
such as teasing, bullying, ridicule, and physical violence. The criterion of most viewed videos was chosen because it was felt that
an evaluation of these videos, which likely would have the greatest impact (e.g., a large number of viewers and views), would be a
reasonable strategy for the ﬁrst evaluation of this media source. It
also seemed important to include videos wherein only the comments provided about the video were stigmatizing (but not the
video itself), because these comments on the video could reﬂect
fat stigmatization. Therefore, some videos were included if the
only evidence of fat stigmatization was in the ‘comments’ criteria; whereas some videos met other criteria, and could conceivably
have contained no fat stigmatization comments.
Using a coding scheme modeled on Himes and Thompson
(2007), each video was coded and categorized according to the following: (1) gender of the target (male, female), (2) age of the target
(child, adolescent, adult), (3) ethnicity of the target (White, Black,
Latino, Asian, other), (4) presence of an antagonist, (5) gender of
the antagonist, (6) age of the antagonist, (7) ethnicity/race of the
antagonist, (8) whether or not the original form of the media had
a fat stigmatizing purpose, (9) whether or not the YouTube video
had a fat stigmatizing purpose, (10) whether the title of the video
was fat stigmatizing, (11) the video’s rating (out of 5 stars, 5 being
the best rating), (12) the number of ratings the video had received,
(13) the number of views the video had received, (14) the number
of comments the video had received, and (15) out of the 10 most
recent comments made regarding the video, how many were fat
stigmatizing.
Whether or not the original form of the media had a fat stigmatizing purpose refers to media that initially may have intended to be
educational or informative but was used on YouTube as fat stigmatizing. For example, in one instance, a news clip of an obese young
female was set to music and used on YouTube to make fun of the
little girl’s weight. Also, the purpose of the video on YouTube may
not have been stigmatizing, but the comments posted regarding
the video may have made it stigmatizing. For example, there was
a video of a woman exercising and the title of the video was not
stigmatizing, however the comments about the video were judged
to be stigmatizing.
The rating of the presence or absence of an antagonist was a
necessary category because there may or may not be an antagonist present in the video. Sometimes the title or comments make
the video stigmatizing without anyone actually being in the video
with the victim. Ethnicity was determined based on two elements:
appearance and language. While not the most accurate way to

91

determine this aspect of the target and antagonist demographics,
this was the only information available given the vignettes.
Rating of videos
Initially, 50 fat-speciﬁc YouTube videos were selected. Two pilot
sessions were conducted in which videos were viewed by the
two viewers (authors MGH and SNF). Approximately 10% of the
vignettes were removed from further analyses for the following
reasons: a non-overweight person was the target of fat comments,
fat comments were not stigmatizing, fat empowerment commentary, and videos were not weight-related. Although the deleted
videos were examples of “fat” speech in media, they were not relevant to the purpose of the current study, which was to identify
and quantify fat stigmatization. Using the search term “fat” also
produced irrelevant results (e.g., artists or songs with the word fat
in the title), which were omitted. Videos illustrating fat empowerment (e.g., overweight women saying positive things about heavier
women) were removed because they did not reﬂect fat stigmatization. These videos were discarded and replaced by the next videos
in the list that met criteria.
The ﬁrst two authors rated the videos independently. The overall kappa of all the variables was .92 (range: .81–1.0). Individual
category kappa statistics were the following: target gender (1.0),
target age (1.0), target ethnicity (1.0), antagonist presence (1.0),
antagonist gender (1.0), antagonist age (1.0), antagonist ethnicity
(1.0), original purpose stigmatizing (.88), Youtube purpose stigmatizing (.92), title stigmatizing (.82), 10 most recent comments
stigmatizing (.81).
Results
Overall, the ﬁndings indicated that men were the target of fat
stigmatization (62.1%) almost twice as often as women (36.4%),
with 1.5% of the targets “unknown” (“unknown” refers to a video
wherein there was a clear target or antagonist present, but the
gender, age or ethnicity was not clearly visible or detectable). In
terms of age, adults were the target of fat stigmatization (51.5%)
most often, followed by children (25.8%), adolescents (19.7%) and
“unknown” (3.0%). Whites were the target (72.7%) the majority of
the time, followed by African Americans and Hispanics both tied at
9.1%, and Asians and “unknown” each at 3.0%.
Forty-six percent of the videos had an antagonist present in the
video. Of those 46%, the antagonist was male in 88.5% of the cases,
followed by female (7.7%) and “unknown” (3.8%). The antagonist
was most often an adult (46.2%), followed by adolescents (19.2%),
children (15.4%) and “unknown” (19.2%). The ethnicity of the antagonist in those videos was most often White (65.4%), followed by
“unknown” (23.1%), African Americans (7.7%), and Hispanics (3.8%).
It is also informative to look at the ratio of ﬁndings vis-à-vis
target to antagonist by gender. Women were rarely the antagonist
(7.7%) but were often targets (36.4%), while men were the antagonist 11.5 times (88.5%) the rate of women, but they were only 1.7
times more often stigmatized (62.1% vs. 36.4%).
The videos were rated by YouTube viewers on a scale of 1–5, 1
being the lowest rating a video can receive and 5 being the highest.
The average across all videos was 4.13 (range: 1–5). The minimum
number of people that rated each video was 343, the maximum was
32,100 and the mean was 6518. The minimum number of views
was 817,804, the maximum was 13,766,685, and the mean was
2,439,152. The minimum number of comments left for each video
was 367, maximum was 46,251, and mean was 7767. As noted earlier, the 10 most recent comments were rated for fat stigmatizing
content. The range was 0–8, with a mean of 2.48, indicating that
24.8% of the 10 most recent comments were stigmatizing.

92

M. Hussin et al. / Body Image 8 (2011) 90–92

When the targets of the videos were examined for age within
gender, the following breakdown was found: 11 male children were
stigmatized, 16 male adolescents, 29 male adults, 8 female children,
3 female adolescents, and 18 female adults. Although not coded formally, a qualitative evaluation of the type of stigmatizing suggested
that adolescent and adult males were stigmatized for being awkward and accident prone while adolescent and adult females were
stigmatized for being sexually unappealing. Children of both genders were seen as being lazy and engaging in uncontrolled eating.
Discussion
The purpose of the current study was to conduct a content
analysis of fat stigmatization in YouTube videos, a popular form
of media that is viewed over two billion times daily. The ﬁndings
indicated that the overwhelming majority of fat-speciﬁc material
was targeted at White male adults and was made by White male
adult antagonists. Additionally, results indicated that these types
of videos are viewed at a very high rate, with an average viewing of
almost 2.5 million views. Clearly, this type of media exposure must
be added to the usual media suspects (TV, movies, magazines) as
a source of fat stigmatization and weight bias (Ata & Thompson,
2010; Himes & Thompson, 2007) that may potentially lead to body
dissatisfaction (Thompson et al., 2005).
The ﬁndings partially replicate and extend past work on fat
stigmatization in the media. Himes and Thompson (2007) also
found that men were primarily the antagonist rather than women
in their content analysis of movies and television shows. However,
unlike Himes and Thompson (2007) who found that the targets
were equally balanced among men and women, we found that men
were twice as likely to be the targets. As with our ﬁndings that
Whites were more likely to be targets and antagonists, these gender ﬁndings are possibly due to the differential base rates for these
video characteristics – our survey revealed that fat stigmatizing
videos are largely composed of White men being stigmatized by
White men. However, even given this limitation, it should be noted
that women were seldom the antagonist (7.7%) but were targets
over 1/3 of the time (36.4%) whereas men were the antagonist 11.5
times the rate of women (88.5%) yet were only 1.7 times (62.1% vs.
36.4%) more often stigmatized.
This initial content analysis of YouTube material is limited in
several ways. First, YouTube includes content that is unique and
ﬁrst-run on its website, along with footage that originally appeared
elsewhere (television and movies). In our content analysis, we
did not differentiate based on this characteristic. Additionally, the
method of determining ethnicity of the targets and antagonists was
limited by the information available for rating. However, the kappa

for both target and antagonist ratings was high (1.0). Furthermore,
the sample of videos was also somewhat small and targeted. An
extension of the current study might enlarge the sample size and
stratify the variable of viewership, by potentially selecting videos
from the range of viewer hits. Also, it should be noted that the
external validity of the ﬁndings is necessarily limited by participant
characteristics and video selection issues: targets and antagonists
in these videos are predominantly male and White. Whether these
participant characteristics approximate to fat stigmatization occurrences in the real world is unknown. Finally, even though this
content analysis documented the presence of stigmatizing content
in YouTube, it is not known if this exposure actually produces body
dissatisfaction or perhaps weight bias in those individuals who
view the videos. Such a study would need to control for a multitude of methodological issues, such as experimental demand and
social desirability (Thompson, 2009).
References
Ata, R., & Thompson, J. K. (2010). Weight bias in the media: A review of recent
research. Obesity Facts: The European Journal of Obesity, 3, 41–46.
Bobo, L. (2001). Racial attitudes and relations at the close of the twentieth century.
In N. Smelser, W. Wilson & F. Mitchell (Eds.), America becoming: Racial trends and
their consequences (pp. 264–301). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Brownell, K. D., Puhl, R. M., Schwartz, M. B. & Rudd, L. (Eds.). (2005). Weight bias:
Nature, consequences and remedies. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fiske, S. (2003). Social beings: A core motives approach to social psychology. New York,
NY: Wiley.
Fouts, G., & Burggraf, K. (1999). Television situation comedies: Female body images
and verbal reinforcements. Sex Roles, 40, 1008–1012.
Fouts, G., & Vaughan, K. (2002). Television situation comedies: Male weight, negative
references, and audience reactions. Sex Roles, 46, 439–442.
Himes, S., & Thompson, J. (2007). Fat stigmatization in television shows and movies:
A content analysis. Obesity, 15, 712–718.
King, E., Hebl, M., & Heatherton, T. (2005). Theories of stigma: Limitations and needed
directions. In K. D. Brownell, R. M. Puhl, M. B. Schwartz & L. Rudd (Eds.), Weight
bias: Nature, consequences and remedies (pp. 109–120). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Latner, J. D., Rosewall, J. K., & Simmonds, M. B. (2007). Childhood obesity stigma:
Associations with television, videogame, and magazine exposure. Body Image:
An International Journal of Research, 4, 147–155.
Latner, J. D., & Schwartz, M. B. (2005). Weight bias in a child’s world. In K. D. Brownell,
R. M. Puhl, M. B. Schwartz & L. Rudd (Eds.), Weight bias: Nature, consequences and
remedies (pp. 54–67). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Neumark-Sztainer, D., & Haines, J. (2004). Psychosocial and behavioral consequences
of obesity. In J. K. Thompson (Ed.), Handbook of eating disorders and obesity (pp.
349–371). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Thompson, J. K. (2009). Commentary: Special Issue: Mass media, body image and
eating disorders. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 28, 127–132.
Thompson, J. K, Heinberg, L. J., Altabe, M., & Tantleff-Dunn, S. (1999). Exacting beauty:
Theory, assessment, and treatment of body image disturbance. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Thompson, J. K., Herbozo, S., Himes, S., & Yamamiya, Y. (2005). Weight-related teasing in adults. In K. D. Brownell, R. M. Puhl, M. B. Schwartz & L. Rudd (Eds.), Weight
bias: Nature, consequences and remedies (pp. 137–149). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.

