Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Quantifying Search Bias: Investigating Sources of Bias
for Political Searches in Social Media
Juhi Kulshrestha
MPI-SWS, Germany
Muhammad Bilal Zafar
MPI-SWS, Germany

Motahhare Eslami
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA
Saptarshi Ghosh
IIEST Shibpur, India

Johnnatan Messias
MPI-SWS, Germany
Krishna P. Gummadi
MPI-SWS, Germany

Karrie Karahalios
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA
Adobe Research, USA
systems that users rely on for a variety of daily tasks from locating specific websites or content to learning broadly about
events, people, or businesses unfamiliar to them. When a user
is trying to “learn” or gather information about a topic [45],
search engines could influence the user’s opinions about the
topic by preferentially ranking results that correspond to one
particular perspective on the topic above others. This possibility is particularly troubling in the context of informational
queries about polarizing topics like political debates or politicians, where contrasting perspectives exist. Recently conducted field studies have shown that not only do users place
greater trust in higher ranked search results [29], but also that
user opinions about political candidates can be manipulated
by biased rankings of search results [8].

ABSTRACT

Search systems in online social media sites are frequently
used to find information about ongoing events and people.
For topics with multiple competing perspectives, such as political events or political candidates, bias in the top ranked results significantly shapes public opinion. However, bias does
not emerge from an algorithm alone. It is important to distinguish between the bias that arises from the data that serves as
the input to the ranking system and the bias that arises from
the ranking system itself. In this paper, we propose a framework to quantify these distinct biases and apply this framework to politics-related queries on Twitter. We found that
both the input data and the ranking system contribute significantly to produce varying amounts of bias in the search results
and in different ways. We discuss the consequences of these
biases and possible mechanisms to signal this bias in social
media search systems’ interfaces.

Characterizing the bias present in a search system can be quite
challenging. Search engines employ a ranking system to retrieve a list of results from a corpus of data (i.e., collection of
web pages or user posts like tweets) based on their relevance
to a user’s query. So, when quantifying the bias of a search
engine in response to a query, it is useful to distinguish (i) the
bias that arises from the data corpus that acts as input to the
ranking system of the search engine, from (ii) the bias that
arises from the ranking system itself. In this paper, we shed
light on these challenges by answering the following research
questions:

ACM Classification Keywords

H.1.2 User / Machine Systems: Human information processing; H.3.3 Information Search and Retrieval: Search process;
H.3.5 On-line Information Services: Web-based services
Author Keywords

Search Bias; Search Bias Quantification; Sources of Search
Bias; Social Media Search; Political Bias Inference; Twitter;
INTRODUCTION

• RQ1: How can we quantify the different sources of search
engine bias?

As algorithmic decision making systems pervade our daily
lives, there is a growing concern about their lack of transparency and their potential for offering biased or discriminatory results to their users [10]. Search engines are one of these

• RQ2: How biased are the search results for political topics
on social media sites like Twitter? Where does this bias in
the search results come from?
We address these questions for political queries related to the
2016 US Presidential primaries using Twitter Search. We
chose a social media search engine because people are increasingly relying on social media for their news. In recent elections, it has become common for people to search
for information about political candidates and events on social media sites [40]. Furthermore, in August 2015, the Pew
Research Center announced that approximately two thirds

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

CSCW ’17, February 25-March 01, 2017, Portland, OR, USA
c 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4335-0/17/03. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998321

417

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

of American adults received their news from Twitter—and
they continued to follow news threads on Twitter as they progressed [25].

RELATED WORK

To answer our first question, we first propose a search bias
quantification framework that quantifies the bias of the output results of a search engine. Moreover, this framework also
discerns to what extent this output bias is due to the input
data set that feeds into the ranking system and how much is
due to the bias introduced by the ranking system. Our framework requires a methodology for inferring political bias of
individual search results. Hence, we also developed a method
to infer the political bias of individual data items on Twitter
with high accuracy and coverage.

In recent years, there has been a growing interest in studying the bias in Web search engines results [11, 26, 39, 41, 42].
Much of this work has been motivated by the concern that
dominant search engines like Google might favor certain
websites over others when ranking relevant search results.
For example, Google might preferentially rank videos from
YouTube (owned by Google) over videos from competing
sites. Whereas, exploring geographical bias, [42] measured
whether sites from certain countries are covered more than
sites from other countries in search results.

To address the second question, we gathered data for 25 political queries in Twitter search in December 2015 during a
week in which two presidential debates occurred—one Republican debate and one Democratic debate. Applying our
quantification method on the collected data, we found that
both the input data and the ranking system contribute significantly in producing the bias in the resulting Twitter search
results. For example, while the Twitter stream containing our
selected queries (the input data) contributed to the output data
by adding a democratic bias on average, the ranking system
shifted or in some cases altered the polarity of this bias, resulting in a substantially different political bias in the final
search results.

Several studies have explored political bias in Web search results and search queries. While Weber et al [43] inferred political leanings of search queries by linking the queries with
political blogs, Epstein and Robertson [8] studied how bias
in search rankings can influence people’s candidate selection
in elections. They asked people unaware of the political candidates in an election to search for the candidates and form
an opinion based on the results. By biasing the search results in a controlled manner, they showed that search rankings
could impact their voting preferences in an election by 20%
or more. Their observations demonstrate the potential impact
of search results on the political opinion of users, and thus
provide the motivation for our present study.

This collective contribution of the input data and the ranking
system in producing the output bias can noticeably affect a
user’s search experience. We observed, for instance, that the
Twitter input data stream for the most popular candidates in
a party were more biased towards the opposing political perspective. However, the manner in which the ranking system
altered the input to produce the output, and therefore its bias,
was different for the popular candidates from each political
party. While the ranking system mitigated the opposing bias
in the search results for the most popular democratic candidate, it enhanced it for the most popular republican candidate.
Simply put, if a user searches for the most popular republican
candidate, she will get more tweets from the opposing political party than if she searched for the most popular democratic
candidate. This may be less than desirable for a popular republican candidate if the users with the opposing polarity primarily post negative tweets about the candidate that result in
negatively biased search results for her or him. Additionally,
we also observed that differently phrased but similar queries
(referring to the same debate event) can yield significantly
different biases.

A complementary line of work has studied the differences
or biases in Web search results due to personalization, i.e.,
the differences in the results seen by different users for the
same query. [14, 18] studied differences in search results due
to the geo-location of users. [19] studied how the informationseeking behavior of users changes due to a major event such
as a shooting incident, and found that most people use search
engines to access information that they agree with. These
studies are performed from the viewpoint of particular users,
whereas the present work shows that political biases exist
even in non-personalized search results in the context of social media.

Bias in Web Search

Measuring Political Bias on Social Media

While there have been prior attempts to infer the political bias
of textual content in online forums, such as blogs and news
articles [1, 46, 51] or hashtags on Twitter [44], to our knowledge, no work has measured the political bias of a tweet based
on its textual content, particularly due to its very small size.
Instead, many previous studies have tried to infer the bias of
a tweet’s source (the user who posted it), by modeling the
language usage of the users from different political polarities [23, 32] or by leveraging the social links that a user has
with other Twitter users with known biases [6,13]. Conover et
al. [5] inferred the political alignment of Twitter users, based
on the tweets or hashtags posted by the users, as well as the
community structure of diffusion networks (via retweets) of
political information, observing that the mechanism relying
on social network performs better. In [50], the authors automatically measure the impartiality of the social media posts
based on how discernible the affiliation of the author is.

Lastly, we call for raising the awareness of search engine
users by signaling the bias in the search results. We briefly
discuss two possible solutions of either incorporating the bias
in the ranking systems itself or incorporating it in search engine designs by making the bias in the search results transparent to users.

418

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

While all the aforementioned studies try to infer a Twitter
user’s bias, they rely on the assumption that the political leaning of a user is explicit in either her language or her social
network. This may not be the case with many users who either do not post political content frequently or do not connect
to other political users directly, but might still have political
leanings. To account for this constraint, we build upon these
prior studies to propose a new methodology to infer the bias
of a user by including other factors correlated with the political affiliation of a user, namely her interests.

{ i1 (s1 ),
i2 (s2 ),
i3 (s3 ),
i4 (s4 ),
i5 (s5 )}

Ranking
System

(set)
Input
(Relevant items)

Cross-Ideological Interactions on Social Media

With the rising popularity of social media sites like Twitter and Facebook, users are increasingly relying on them
to obtain news [21], real-time information about ongoing
events and public opinion on celebrities [40]. While some
researchers envisaged increased democratization through social media usage, with higher engagement between users who
do not share the same political ideology [35], some others
argued that social media usage can result in selective exposure by providing a platform that reinforces users’ existing biases [22]. By examining cross-ideological exposure
through content and network analysis, [17] showed that political talk on Twitter is highly partisan and users are unlikely to
be exposed to cross-ideological content through their friendship network. Other studies have also confirmed these results
by demonstrating users’ higher willingness to communicate
with other like-minded social media users [22, 37] and their
inability to engage in meaningful discussions with differentminded users [47] .

i2 (s2 ),
i4 (s4 ),
i5 (s5 ),
i1 (s1 ),
i3 (s3 )
(ranked list)
Output
(Ranked items)

Figure 1: Overview of our search bias quantification framework. For a
given query q, a set of data items relevant to the query is first selected. Each
individual data item (e.g., i1 , i2 ) has some bias (e.g., s1 , s2 ). Then this set
of relevant items is input to the ranking system which produces a ranked list
of the items. We define metrics for capturing the bias in the set of relevant
items input to the ranking system (input bias), and in the ranked list output
by the ranking system (output bias).

creating discriminatory ads based on gender [7] or race [38],
showing different prices for the same products/services to different users [15] and mistakenly labeling a black man as an
ape by an image tagging algorithm [16] – are some such examples. These issues have lead researchers, organizations and
even governments towards a new avenue of research called
“auditing algorithms”, which endeavors to understand if and
how an algorithmic system can cause biases, particularly
when they are misleading or discriminatory to users [10, 34].
Besides the algorithm design, biased input data to an algorithm can also result in a biased output. This insight is particularly crucial in this digital era where many algorithms are
trained using huge amounts of data [2]. Therefore, distinguishing whether a bias in an algorithmic system’s output is
caused by its input or the algorithm itself, is of prime importance. This work is a first step towards tackling this challenge
in the area of search systems.

To understand the political bias in social media better, many
researchers have studied political polarization on Twitter
through analyzing different groups’ behavior. [6] showed that
Twitter users usually retweet the users who have the same political ideology as themselves, making the retweeting network
structure highly partitioned into left- and right-leaning groups
with limited connections between them. Liao et al. [20] investigated political polarization in the context of a majority and
minority group on a political topic (pro-snowden vs. antisnowden), finding that while the Twitter population is more
likely to be pro-snowden, the minority group (anti-snowden)
uses some features of the biased environment such as retweeting to mitigate this existing bias.

RQ1: QUANTIFYING SEARCH ENGINE BIAS

This section focuses on our first research question – the quantification of search bias. In this paper, we quantify the search
bias for the Twitter social media search engine in the context
of the US political scenario, where there are two main political parties: the Democratic party and the Republican party.

Instead of studying the interactions between cross-ideological
users, our current study explores the problem of measuring
political bias of social media search engine and unpacking the
sources of bias. While many studies have shown the existence
of political bias in social media, to our knowledge none have
characterized the sources of this bias. Little is known about
how much bias is inherent in the data and whether and how
the search system enhances or mitigates this bias. Our study
tries to shed light on these questions through investigating the
sources of political bias in the context of 2016 US presidential
election on Twitter.

We first propose a framework to capture the different stages
of a search process and then discuss metrics to measure the
biases at each stage (RQ1a). This framework requires a
methodology for inferring the bias of individual search items,
and later in the section we present such a methodology in the
context of Twitter search (RQ1b).
RQ1a: Search Engine Bias Quantification Framework

Figure 1 gives an intuitive illustration of the main stages of
retrieving information via an algorithmic search system. The
search system retrieves information from a corpus of data
items. Each of these data items has a bias associated with
it, given by the bias score s (computed as described in the

Auditing Algorithms

Today, algorithms that curate and present information in online platforms can affect users’ experiences significantly –

419

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

Rank r

Bias till rank r

1

B(q, 1)

s2

2

B(q, 2)

3

B(q, 3)

4

B(q, 4)

5

B(q, 5)

1
(s
2 2
1
(s
3 2
1
(s
4 2
1
(s
5 2

Output bias at rank 5

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Value

We next define metrics for the input bias, output bias and
ranking bias, in terms of the bias scores of the individual data
items.

+ s4 )
+ s4 + s5 )

Input Bias: When a user issues a query to the search system, a set of items that are relevant to the query is selected
out of the whole corpus, and provided as input to the ranking
system. This input data captures the bias introduced by the
query by filtering the relevant items from the whole corpus of
data. Therefore, we measure the input bias for a query as the
aggregate bias of all items relevant to the query, that become
the input to the ranking system. Put differently, input bias
gives a measure of what bias a user would have observed, had
she been shown random items relevant to the query, instead
of a list ranked by the ranking system.

+ s4 + s5 + s1 )
+ s4 + s5 + s1 + s3 )

1
[s (1 + 21 + 13 + 14 + 15 )
5 2
s4 ( 21 + 13 + 14 + 15 ) +
s5 ( 13 + 14 + 15 ) +
s1 ( 41 + 15 ) +
s3 ( 51 )]

+

Table 1: Explaining the bias metrics with reference to Figure 1.

Specifically, the Input Bias IB(q) for query q is the average
bias of all n data items that are relevant to q
Pn
si
IB(q) = i=1
(1)
n

next section: RQ1b). When a user submits a search query, a
set of data items that is relevant to the query is first retrieved
(selected out of all data items in the entire corpus). Then, the
set of retrieved relevant items constitutes the input data to the
ranking system which produces a ranked list of the relevant
items, and this ranked list is shown to the user as the search
output.1 The users generally give much more attention and
importance to the top-ranked items in the list than the lowerranked items [24].

where the summation is over all the bias scores (si ) of the n
data items found relevant to q. For instance, for the query q
shown in Figure 1, the input bias is simply IB(q) = 15 (s1 +
s2 + s3 + s4 + s5 ).
Output Bias: The output bias is the effective bias presented
to the user (who issued the search query) via the final ranked
list from the search engine. While quantifying search bias,
it must be noted that, whereas the input bias was for an unordered set of items, the output search bias is to be measured
over a ranked list. The higher ranked items should be given
more importance, since not only are the users more likely to
browse through the top search results [24], but they also tend
to have more trust in them [29]. Hence, we propose a metric for output search bias, that is inspired by the well-known
metric Average Precision [24] from the Information Retrieval
literature.

In the case of Twitter search engine, the data corpus comprises of the set of all tweets. When a query like ‘Bernie
Sanders’ is issued to Twitter search, all the tweets containing ‘Bernie Sanders’ are selected as relevant items. This set
of relevant tweets serves as the input to the ranking system,
which orders them to output a ranked list of tweets which are
displayed to the user.
In our framework, we quantify three different biases for a
search system, in terms of the biases of the individual data
items: (i) input bias: the bias in the set of retrieved items
relevant to the query (filtered out of the whole corpus), that
serves as the input data to the ranking system, (ii) ranking
bias: the bias introduced by the ranking system, and (iii) output bias: the cumulative bias in the ranked list output by the
search system. In the remainder of the section, we discuss the
metrics we use to quantify these biases for Twitter search in
the context of US politics.

For a given search query q, we first define the bias till a particular rank r in the ranked results (i.e., the aggregate bias of
the top r results). The bias B(q, r) till rank r of the output
ranked list is defined as
Pr
si
(2)
B(q, r) = i=1
r

Bias of an individual data item: As mentioned earlier, the
search scenario that we are considering is one of the US politics, where there are mainly two political parties. Each data
item (i.e., a tweet) can be positively biased (i.e., supporting)
or negatively biased (i.e., opposing) or neutral towards each
of these two parties, and the bias score of each item (indicated by si in Figure 1) captures the degree to which the item
is biased with respect to the two parties. In the next section
(RQ1b), we describe a methodology for measuring the bias
score of items in the context of US political searches on Twitter social media.

where the summation is over the top r items in the ranked list.
For instance, with respect to the situation shown in Fig. 1,
Table 1 (first five rows) shows the bias till ranks 1, 2, ..., 5.
Next, we extend the above definition to define the Output
Search Bias OB(q, r) for the query q at rank r.
Pr
B(q, i)
OB(q, r) = i=1
(3)
r
For instance, the last row of Table 1 computes OB(q, r)
at rank r = 5 with respect to the situation shown in Figure 1. Note that the bias score s2 of the top-ranked item i2 is
given the highest weight, followed by the bias score s4 of the
second-ranked item i4 , and so on. This follows the intuition

1
The framework can also be generalized to modern-day IR systems
which perform retrieval and ranking together, such as systems using
topic modeling. We comment on this issue in the Discussion section.

420

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

that bias in the higher ranked items are likely to influence the
user more than bias in the lower ranked items.2

based on their interests. Our methodology for inferring the
political bias of a given Twitter user u is based on the following steps – (i) generating two representative sets of users who
are known to have a democratic or republican bias, (ii) inferring the topical interests of u, and (iii) examining how closely
u’s interests match with the interests of the representative sets
of democratic and republican users.

Ranking Bias: The ranking bias is intended to capture the
additional bias introduced by the ranking system, over the
bias that was already present in the set of relevant items (i.e.,
relevant to q) input to the ranking system. If possible, ranking
bias could be measured by auditing the exact ranking system
being deployed by the search engines. However, for any commercial search engine deployed in the real-world, it is infeasible to know the internal details of the ranking system. Hence,
we view the ranking system as a ‘black box’ where we only
observe the inputs and outputs.

Generating representative sets of democratic and republican users: The first step in our methodology involves getting representative sets of democratic and republican users.
One option would be to collect a dataset of users who report their political affiliations on Twitter. However, such a
dataset would suffer from self-reportage problem, while also
being biased towards the group of users who have self reported. Instead, we use the methodology in [12, 36], which
infers the topical attributes of a user v by mining the Twitter
Lists that other users have included v in. Thus, we rely on
what other people are reporting about a user, and not what
she is identifying herself as. Using this method, we extracted
a seed set 865 users who have been labelled with the topic
‘democrats’ and a seed set of 1,348 users labelled with the
topic ‘republicans’. These seed sets of users include politicians (e.g., Steny Hoyer, Matt Blunt), political organizations
(e.g., DCCC, Homer Lkprt Tea-party) as well as regular users.

Thus, we define the Ranking Bias RB(q, r) for the query q
as simply the difference between the output bias and the input
bias for q (as defined earlier).
RB(q, r) = OB(q, r) − IB(q)

(4)

Time-Averaged Bias: To capture the overall trend in the bias,
we collect multiple snapshots of search results, compute the
different bias metrics for each snapshot, and then compute
the time-averaged values of the aforementioned metrics. For
instance we compute the time-averaged output search bias
T OB(q, r) as the average of the OB(q, r) (given by Equation 3) values measured at various instants of time. Similarly,
we define T IB(q) and T RB(q, r) as the time-averaged input
bias and time-averaged ranking bias for query q respectively.

Inferring topical interests of a user: After obtaining the
representative sets of democratic and republican users, the
next step is to infer a user’s interests on Twitter. To address
this challenge, we rely on the methodology in [3], which
for a user u, returns a list of topics of interest of u along
with the frequency of each topic. Here the frequency of a
topic indicates the number of users whom u follows, who
have been labelled with this topic using the aforementioned
method in [12, 36]. For instance, if a user u follows 3 users
tagged with ‘politics’ and 4 users tagged with ‘music’, then
the returned list would be {politics: 3, music: 4}. We convert
this < topic, frequency > list into a weighted tf idf vector
for user u, where the idf -s are computed considering the interest lists of all the users in our dataset. We refer to this
tf idf vector as the interest-vector Iu of the user u. Specifically, if a user u follows f users on a particular topic, then the
corresponding entry in the interest-vector of u is computed
using tf = 1 + logf and idf = log N
n , where N is the number of all users in our dataset, and n is the number of users
who follow at least one user tagged with this topic.

RQ1b: Measuring the Political Bias of an Individual Twitter Search Result

For applying our search bias quantification framework to
Twitter search in our chosen context of US politics, we require an automated method for inferring the political bias of
an individual Twitter search result – a tweet. To measure the
bias of a tweet, we have two options (i) we can measure the
source bias, i.e. the bias of the author of the tweet, or (ii) we
can measure the content bias, i.e., the bias of the content of
the tweet. Especially, since the content of the tweet is quite
short (only 140 characters), attempting to judge the bias from
the short content may not always be accurate; therefore, in
this paper we choose to use the source bias to measure the
political bias of an individual Twitter search result.
In the rest of this section, we start by present our methodology
for inferring source bias of a tweet and then evaluate how well
it works. Finally, we end with a brief analysis of how well the
source bias and content bias match each other in practice in
the context of political search queries.

Note that, if we are unable to get the followings of a user (due
to her account being protected, or her following no one), or
if she follows too few users (less than 10), we are not able
to infer her interests and hence political leaning. However,
the study [3] showed that this methodology of inferring interests is applicable for a very large fraction of active users in
Twitter.

Source Bias - Inferring Political Bias of Twitter Users
It has been reported that people’s political affiliation is correlated with their various attributes.3 In this work, we leverage
this insight to infer political affiliations of users on Twitter

Matching interests of user to interests of democrats and
republicans: Using the aforementioned formulation, we also
obtain the interest vectors of all the users in the two seed
sets. Then, we construct a normalized aggregate interest vector for the democrat seed set (ID ) and the republican seed
set (IR ), by aggregating the interest vectors of all users in

2

In case the bias score of a particular item in the ranked list cannot
be inferred, this item can be ignored and the rankings can be recomputed. This is similar to how missing relevance judgements are
handled in the Information Retrieval literature [48].
3
http://2012election.procon.org/
view.resource.php?resourceID=004818

421

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Evaluation for politically interested common users

the set and normalizing such that each aggregate vector sums
up to 1.0. Some of the top terms in ID are [progressive,
democrats, obama, dems, policy, liberals, p2, activists, dc,
international] while those in IR are [patriots, conservative,
tcot, right, gop, republican, tea party, republicans, fox news,
pundits], where the terms are ranked in decreasing order of
their tf idf scores. We observe that apart from terms related
to politics, the two vectors also differ in terms of their emphasis on other topics, for example IR gives higher weight to
sports-related terms, while ID gives higher weight to terms
related to technology and entertainment. Thus, these vectors
can be used to infer the likely political bias of a wide range
of users, even if they are not explicitly following politicians
on Twitter, or even if they are following politicians from both
parties.

To identify a set of politically interested common users, we
followed the methodology given in [22]. We used the Twitter accounts of democratic (@TheDemocrats) and republican
(@GOP) parties as seed accounts, and collected up to 100
retweeters of each of the most recent 3,200 tweets posted
by the two accounts. Doing so, we collected 98,955 distinct users who retweeted @TheDemocrats and 71,270 distinct users who retweeted @GOP. Out of these users, we randomly selected 100 retweeters each of the democratic and republican account, giving us a test set of 200 common users
who are politically interested.
Judging the ground truth bias of test users: To get the bias
annotations for political leanings of these 200 users, we conducted an Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) survey where
human workers were shown a link to a user’s Twitter profile, and asked to label the user as either pro-democratic, prorepublican, or neutral, based on the user’s profile attributes
and the tweets posted by the user. We got judgements from
50 distinct AMT workers for each test user. The AMT bias
score of each user was computed by adding +1 for each prodemocratic judgement, −1 for each pro-republican judgement and 0 for each neutral judgement, and then normalizing by the total number of judgements. Thus, the AMT
bias score for a user lies in the range [−1.0, 1.0], where a
more positive score indicates a stronger democratic bias (with
more AMT workers labelling the user as pro-democratic),
whereas a more negative score indicates a stronger republican bias (with more AMT workers labelling the user as prorepublican).

Finally, given a user u whose political bias is to be inferred,
we obtain the interest-vector Iu of u (as described above), and
compute the cosine similarity of Iu with ID and IR . Then the
bias score of user u is given by,
Bias(u) = cos sim(Iu , ID ) − cos sim(Iu , IR ).

(5)

We max-min normalize these differences in similarity, such
that the bias score of a user lies in the range [−1.0, 1.0]. A
bias score closer to +1.0 indicates that u is more democratic
leaning, and a score closer to −1.0 indicates that u is more
republican leaning.
Public deployment of the source bias inference methodology: We have publicly deployed the aforementioned
source bias inference methodology in the form of a Twitter
application, at http://twitter-app.mpi-sws.org/searchpolitical-bias-of-users/. One can login to the application using her Twitter credentials, and see their inferred political affiliation. One can also search for other Twitter users to
check out their inferred political leaning.

Evaluating our inferred score: Our methodology could infer the bias of all the 200 selected users (coverage = 100%).
To quantify the accuracy of the methodology, we check
whether our inferred bias scores correlate well with the AMT
bias scores.

Evaluation of Political Bias Inference Methodology

To verify this, we present Table 2 and Table 3. In Table 2,
we bin our inferred bias scores for these test users into three
ranges [-1.0, -0.5], (-0.5, 0.5) and [0.5, 1.0], and then we compute the average AMT bias scores for users in each bin. As
can be seen from Table 2, the average AMT bias score for
Bin 1 (corresponding to users inferred to be strongly republican) is strongly republican leaning (−0.86), while the average
AMT bias score for Bin 3 (corresponding to users inferred to
be strongly democratic) is strongly democratic leaning (0.93).
Similar results are seen when we bin the users based on AMT
bias scores and then compute the average inferred bias score
for the users in each bin (as shown in Table 3), demonstrating
that our inferred bias scores are well correlated with the AMT
bias scores.

To check whether the source bias inference methodology
works well for whole spectrum of politically interested users,
we carry out the evaluation considering three test sets of Twitter users – (i) politically interested common users, selected
randomly from the set of users who have retweeted the two
parties’ accounts on Twitter, (ii) the current US senators, for
whom it is well known which political party they represent,
and (iii) self-identified common users, each having fewer than
1000 followers, who have themselves indicated their political
ideology in their Twitter account bios.
We first use the set of politically interested common users to
evaluate how good our inferred bias score is. After establishing that our bias score works, we define thresholds on the
score to categorize users into three distinct categories – republican, neutral, democratic. Finally we present how well
our inference methodology works for the senators and self
identified common users.

We also observe that, though there is high correlation between
the AMT bias scores and our inferred scores, the spread of the
distribution of the two scores in the interval [−1.0, 1.0] are
quite different. This difference is shown in Figure 2 which
plots the CDF of the two scores. We observe that while many
of the AMT bias scores are close to the boundaries of the
interval, most of the inferred scores lie within [−0.5, +0.5].

We evaluate the methodology with respect to two metrics:
(i) coverage – for what fraction of Twitter users can the
methodology infer the political bias, and (ii) accuracy – for
what fraction of users is the inference correct.

422

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

Inferred bias score bins
Inferred Bin 1 [-1.0, -0.5]
Inferred Bin 2 (-0.5, 0.5)
Inferred Bin 3 [0.5, 1.0]

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Avg. AMT bias score
−0.86
0.14
0.93

AMT bias score
AMT Bin 1
AMT Bin 2
AMT Bin 3

Table 2: Match between the AMT bias score and our Inferred bias score:
Average AMT bias scores of users binned according to their Inferred
bias score.
AMT bias score bins
AMT Bin 1 [-1.0, -0.5]
AMT Bin 2 (-0.5, 0.5)
AMT Bin 3 [0.5, 1.0]

Avg. Inferred bias score
−0.32
−0.02
0.14

Table 5: Coverage and accuracy of the political bias inference methodology for (i) current US senators, and (ii) common users who have declared
their political ideology in their Twitter account profile.

Discretizing the bias score into categories: Having established that our inferred bias score correlates well with the
AMT bias score, we now want to categorize users according to their bias. To do so, we take the conservative approach of labelling a user as democratic or republican only
when we have high confidence, otherwise to label them as
neutral. To achieve this categorisation, we decided to fix a
suitable threshold x ∈ [0.0, 1.0], and label the users with inferred bias score lying within (−x, x) as neutral, the users
having inferred bias score in the range [−1.0, −x] as republicans, and the users having inferred bias score in the range
[x, 1.0] as democrats. We experimented with several choices
for the threshold x = 0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.08 and 0.1. For
each choice, we computed a confusion matrix of the match
between AMT bias scores and the inferred bias scores. For
instance, Table 4 depicts the confusion matrix of the match
between AMT bias scores and the inferred bias scores for
x = 0.03. We found that the threshold of x = 0.03 maximizes the sum of the diagonal of the confusion matrix. In the
later sections of the paper, we will label users as democrats
or republicans, only when their inferred score falls outside of
the neutral zone (−0.03, 0.03).

Inclusion of a neutral zone has both pros and cons. While
now we have higher confidence in our labels of democrats
and republicans, some of the users who are marginally democratic or republican may now get labelled as neutral. But we
make this conservative choice for our analyses, so as to not
overestimate the bias in the search results.
Evaluation for popular users (US senators)
The performance of the methodology for the 100 current US
senators is summarized in Table 5. The methodology has a
very high coverage for the US senators, and failed to infer the
political bias for only two senators, one from each party. Further investigation showed that one of these senators did not
follow anyone on Twitter, while the other followed only one
other user; hence, we could not infer their topical interests. In
terms of accuracy, our methodology correctly identified the
political bias of 98.1% of the Republican senators for whom
bias could be inferred, and 86.4% of the Democrat senators
whose bias could be inferred.
Evaluation for self-identified common users:
For our final test set, we chose users who have themselves
indicated their political ideology in their Twitter account biography. Using the service Followerwonk (http://moz.com/
followerwonk), we obtained users located in the United
States, with fewer than 1000 followers (to ensure that we
get common users), whose bios contained certain keywords
matching democrats (‘democrat’, ‘liberal’, ‘progressive’) and
republicans (‘republican’, ‘conservative’, ‘libertarian’, ‘tea
party’). The bio of each user was then manually inspected,
and we retained only those users whose bios actually reflected
their political ideology. For instance, users having bios like
“I am a #conservative #Christian who is neither a #Democrat nor a #Republican, but an #Independent voter” and “We
hate Politicians - Democrats, Republicans, all of them.” were
discarded. Finally we obtained 426 self-identified democratic
users and 675 self-identified republican users.

1
AMT bias score
Inferred bias score
0.8

CDF

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0
Bias Score

0.5

Inferred Dem
2.89%
36.36%
83.11%

Political Bias
Coverage Accuracy
Current US Senators
Democratic (n=45)
97.78%
86.36%
Republican (n=54)
98.15%
98.11%
Average
97.96%
92.23%
Self-identified common users
Democratic (n=426) 92.01%
88.52%
Republican (n=675)
90.22%
82.95%
Average
91.12%
85.73%

This difference in the spread of the distributions motivated
us to discretize our inferred bias score, and categorize users
into three classes – democratic-leaning, republican-leaning,
or neutral.

-0.5

Inferred Neutral
13.04%
45.45%
12.98%

Table 4: Confusion matrix of the match between AMT bias scores and
Inferred bias scores

Table 3: Match between the AMT bias score and our Inferred bias score:
Average Inferred bias scores of users binned according to their AMT
bias score.

-1

Inferred Rep
84.05%
18.18%
3.89%

1

Figure 2: CDF of AMT bias scores and Inferred bias scores for politically interested common users.

423

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Content Bias

The performance of the proposed bias detection methodology
on these users with self-identified biases is also indicated in
Table 5. The coverage is 91.12% on average, across democratic and republican users. Closer inspection of the users for
whom we could not infer the bias revealed that they were either protected accounts, or they followed too few accounts,
and as a result their interests could not be inferred.

Strongly rep
[−1.0, −0.75)
Moderately rep
[−0.75, −0.25)
Weakly rep
[−0.25, 0.0)
Neutral
[0.0, 0.0]
Weakly dem
(0.0, 0.25]
Moderately dem
(0.25, 0.75]
Strongly dem
(0.75, 1.0]

The interest vectors of correctly inferred self-identified democratic users contain political terms like ‘liberal’, ‘progressive’, and ‘dem’, as well as other terms like ‘gay’, ‘lgbt’, ‘science’, and ‘tech’. In contrast, those for self-identified republican users contain political terms like ‘tea’, ‘gop’, and ‘palin’
along with other related terms like ‘patriots’, ‘military’, and
‘vets’. On the other hand, many of the users for whom we inferred the incorrect leaning either have opposite leaning tags
in their interest vectors, or their non-political interests end up
matching the interests of the opposite side more than their
own. However, the overall accuracy of bias inference for
these self-identified common users is also high (85.73% on
average across democratic and republican users), as shown in
Table 5.

Fraction
of tweets

Source Bias
Frac
Frac
Rep
Neu
10.66% 14.75%

13.85%

Frac
Dem
74.59%

22.02%

55.73%

13.02%

31.25%

10.33%

22.22%

22.22%

55.56%

5.68%

20.41%

8.16%

71.43%

10.44%

23.33%

13.33%

63.33%

23.16%

16.5%

16.0%

67.5%

14.53%

9.76%

9.76%

80.49%

Table 6: Fraction of tweets in the different ranges of the content bias
score (based on AMT workers’ judgement), and the match between the
source and content bias in the different ranges.

source bias. On the other hand, when the content is weakly biased, our inferred source bias has little or no correlation with
the content bias, since such weakly biased / neutral content is
equally likely to be produced by users with either bias.

Match between Source Bias & Content Bias
As stated earlier, we use the source bias (i.e., the bias of the
user who posted a tweet) to quantify the bias of a tweet, instead of using content bias. In this section, we investigate
how closely source bias and content bias of a tweet reflect
each other.

Next we present the results of applying our bias quantification
framework, using the source bias inference methodology, for
analyzing political searches on Twitter.

Judging the content bias: For each of our selected queries
like “democratic debate”, “republican debate”, “hillary clinton” and “donald trump” (more details on query selection in
the next section), we considered two Twitter search snapshots
– one during the republican debate on December 15, 2015 and
another during the democratic debate on December 19, 2015.
In each snapshot we collected the first page (20 tweets) of
search results, leading to a total of 881 distinct tweets, which
we use to analyze the extent to which source bias and content
bias match each other.

DIA SEARCH

RQ2: CHARACTERIZING POLITICAL BIAS IN SOCIAL ME-

To characterize the bias in Twitter search results via our
framework, we first describe the queries we selected and the
data we gathered from Twitter for our chosen context of US
presidential primaries. We then analyze the collected data
to understand the possible sources of bias in Twitter Search
(RQ2a) and the interplay between the input data and the ranking system that produces the output bias – the bias in the
search results observed by Twitter users (RQ2b).
The Selection of Search Queries: In order to study search
bias via the proposed framework, it would be ideal to have
access to the actual search queries that people are using on
Twitter to get information about the 2016 US Presidential
primary debates. However, as researchers we did not have
access to this proprietary dataset. We, therefore, followed the
two step methodology used in [19] of first identifying a seed
set of queries and then expanding them to satisfy two properties. Our seed set of queries is comprised of the terms “democratic debate”, and “republican debate”, and their shortened
versions “dem debate” and “rep debate” that are popular on
Twitter to accommodate the short length of tweets.

To get the content bias annotations for these 881 tweets, we
conducted an Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) survey where
human workers were shown each tweet (but not the user who
posted it), and they were asked to label the tweet as prodemocratic, pro-republican, or neutral. We got judgements
from 10 distinct workers for each tweet. The content bias
score of each tweet was computed in the same manner as described in the earlier section titled “Evaluation for politically
interested common users”.
To what extent do source bias and content bias match each
other? For studying the match between source bias and content bias, we divide the range of content bias scores into 7
bins, as shown in Table 6, varying from neutral to strongly
biased on both sides. The first thing to note from Table 6 is
that when the content is strongly biased, the match between
the source and content bias is high (about 75% or more), irrespective of whether the content is biased towards the democrat or the republican perspective. This indicates that strongly
biased content is mostly produced by the users with the same

Next we expanded our query set to include other likely related
queries that satisfied two properties: (i) the queries should be
used by many users, and (ii) the queries should not be biased
to a particular party. To satisfy the first property, we used
hashtags to expand our query set, since hashtags are used extensively on Twitter by users to tag and follow discussions
about political topics [5]. Moreover, hashtags act as recommended queries on Twitter; when a user clicks on a hashtag,

424

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Query

Output Bias Input Bias Ranking Bias
(TOB)
(TIB)
(TRB)
Queries Related to Democratic Candidates
Hillary Clinton
0.21
0.03
0.18
Bernie Sanders
0.71
0.55
0.16
Martin O’Malley
0.64
0.57
0.07
Average
0.52
0.38
0.14
Queries Related to Republican Candidates
Donald Trump
0.29
0.19
0.10
Ted Cruz
−0.48
−0.11
−0.37
Marco Rubio
−0.41
−0.12
−0.29
Ben Carson
0.46
0.20
0.26
Chris Christie
−0.14
0.27
−0.41
Jeb Bush
−0.31
0.09
−0.40
Rand Paul
−0.37
−0.18
−0.19
Carly Fiorina
0.16
0.38
−0.22
John Kasich
−0.09
−0.13
0.04
Mike Huckabee
0.30
0.12
0.18
Rick Santorum
−0.04
0.18
−0.22
Lindsey Graham
−0.45
0.07
−0.52
George Pataki
−0.17
0.09
−0.26
Jim Gilmore
−0.35
−0.11
−0.24
Average
−0.11
0.07
−0.18
Queries related to democratic debate
democratic debate
0.43
0.38
0.05
dem debate
0.52
0.29
0.23
#democraticdebate
0.28
0.19
0.07
#demdebate
0.57
0.56
0.01
Average
0.45
0.35
0.10
Queries related to republican debate
republican debate
0.53
0.27
0.26
rep debate
0.31
0.40
−0.09
#republicandebate
0.39
0.34
0.05
#gopdebate
0.04
0.10
−0.06
Average
0.32
0.28
0.04

a Twitter search page for that hashtag is presented to her. To
identify such hashtags, we collected the Twitter search results
for our four seed queries during the November 2015 republican and democratic debates. We then identified the most frequently occurring hashtags containing the term “debate” to
ensure that they are related to the presidential debates. We
found 57 hashtags related to the democratic debate and 63 related to the republican debate. From these, we selected the
top 10 hashtags popular within each political party. This resulted in 15 distinct hashtags.
In addition to being popular, we wanted the queries in our expanded set to be unbiased to avoid over estimating the bias in
search results. We, therefore, removed biased search queries
(e.g., #debatewithbernie, #hillarycantdebate), and only retained queries for whom its difficult to estimate the political
leaning of the poster. This approach resulted in the following queries: democratic debate, dem debate, #democraticdebate, #demdebate, republican debate, rep debate, #republicandebate and #gopdebate. In addition, given that politically
interested users (irrespective of their leaning) can search for
any candidate by name, we also included the names of the
17 presidential candidates to our set of queries. We use our
quantification framework with these 25 queries to measure
the bias for political searches on Twitter.
Data Collection: For our analysis, we selected a one week
time period that contained both a republican and a democratic
debate – December 14 - 21, 2015. The Republican debate
aired on December 15, and the Democratic debate aired on
December 19. Our goal was to capture a representative collection of tweets from Twitter Search that represented both
parties at similar points in time and for a similar event. From
this time period, we collected Twitter search results for each
of the selected queries.

Table 7: Time averaged bias in Twitter search “top” results, for selected
queries (related to political candidates and debates) – output bias T OB,
input bias T IB, and ranking bias T RB. Here a bias value closer to +1.0
indicates democratic bias and a value closer to −1.0 indicates republican
bias.

Twitter search provides different filters on the search results
including “top”, “live”, “news”, “photos” and “videos”.4 The
default, “top” results, contain the tweets chosen by the proprietary Twitter ranking system based on many factors, including the number of users that engaged with a tweet5 . This filter
provides us with the output set for a given search query. To
collect the output set, we collected the top 20 search results
on the first page for each query at 10-minute intervals for the
whole aforementioned time period. The political bias of this
set is the Output Bias defined in our quantification framework. In total, across all the selected queries, we collected
28,800 snapshots that included 34,904 distinct tweets made
by 17,624 distinct users.

De-Personalizing the Search Results: Our objective is to investigate possible bias created by the ranking of presented
tweets. Because bias may be introduced by personalization
features associated with the Twitter user issuing the query, we
focused on the consistent, non-personalized ranking of results
shown to every user to examine bias. To mitigate personalization effects (e.g., geographical personalization based on IP
addresses), all search queries were made without logging in
to Twitter, and from the same IP subnet.
RQ2a: Where Does the Bias Come from?

It is Not Always the Ranking System: Input Data Matters

To collect the input data to the ranking algorithm, we used
Twitter’s streaming API to collect all of the tweets that contained our selected queries during our data collection period
and used this chronologically ordered tweet stream to calculate the Input Bias. Overall, across all the queries, we collected more than 8.2 million tweets posted during this time
period, by 1.88 million distinct users which comprise of the
input data for our selected queries.
4
5

Table 7 shows the three biases (output, input, and ranking) for
the selected queries. It reveals that queries related to democratic and republican candidates as well as democratic and republican debates have a democratic-leaning input bias (larger
than 0) on average. This observation implies that the full
tweet stream containing these query-terms, without any interference from the ranking system, contains a more democratic
slant – although, the democratic bias for queries related to the
republican debate and candidates is lower than that related to
the democratic debate and candidates, on average.

https://twitter.com/search-home
https://support.twitter.com/articles/131209

425

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

TRB of Ranking Strategies
Twitter’s
Most
Most
Ranking Retweeted Favorited
First
First
Queries Related to Democratic Candidates
Hillary Clinton
0.18
0.33
0.25
Bernie Sanders
0.16
0.22
0.16
Martin O’Malley
0.07
0.001
0.1
Queries Related to Republican Candidates
Donald Trump
0.10
0.06
0.09
Ted Cruz
−0.37
−0.49
−0.35
Marco Rubio
−0.29
−0.36
−0.27
Ben Carson
0.26
0.23
0.25
Chris Christie
−0.41
−0.40
−0.34
Jeb Bush
−0.40
−0.46
−0.34
Rand Paul
−0.19
−0.25
−0.17
Carly Fiorina
−0.22
−0.17
−0.18
John Kasich
0.04
0.04
0.11
Mike Huckabee
0.18
0.11
0.19
Rick Santorum
−0.22
−0.34
−0.16
Lindsey Graham
−0.52
−0.45
−0.56
George Pataki
−0.26
−0.22
−0.23
Jim Gilmore
−0.24
−0.22
−0.21
Queries related to democratic debate
democratic debate
0.05
0.21
0.12
dem debate
0.23
0.22
0.22
#democraticdebate
0.07
0.08
0.14
#demdebate
0.01
−0.01
0.01
Queries related to republican debate
republican debate
0.26
0.274
0.268
rep debate
−0.09
−0.09
−0.09
#republicandebate
0.05
0.08
0.17
#gopdebate
−0.06
−0.06
−0.02

It is important to note that there exists a pre-existing bias in
the input data to the ranking system, and that this input bias
can have a significant effect on the final output search bias
seen by the end user. In the case of Bernie Sanders, for example, the output search bias is very democratic (0.71); only
a small fraction of this bias comes from the Twitter ranking system, while the majority originates from the input data,
indicating that most of the Twitter population that discusses
Bernie Sanders on Twitter has a democratic leaning. The effect of input data on the search results’ bias highlights the
importance of incorporating the input data when auditing algorithms, and teasing out how much of the bias is present in
the data itself and how much is contributed by the algorithmic
system.

Query

The democratic leaning input bias on Twitter for a large majority of the queries can be explained by the bias of overall Twitter corpus. We measure the bias of the Twitter corpus in two ways: (i) User population bias: The bias of 1000
Twitter users selected randomly from the Twitter userid space
(i.e., the user-ids were randomly selected from the range of 1
through the id assigned to a newly created account in December 2015), and (ii) Full tweet stream bias: The bias of 1000
tweets selected randomly from Twitter’s 1% random sample
for December 2015. For measuring the corpus bias in both
cases, we applied the same methodology as used for measuring the input bias, i.e., measuring the bias of the users and the
source bias of the tweets. These two approaches resulted in
a population bias of 0.25 and a full tweet stream bias of 0.3.
These positive bias values show that the population of Twitter users is democratic-leaning, and this bias is even more
democratic-leaning when we consider the active users whose
tweets have been included in the full tweet stream (measured
using Twitter’s 1% random sample). These findings are inline with prior studies [31] which have shown that Twitter
has a high fraction of democratic leaning users.

Table 8: Time averaged ranking bias for different ranking strategies:
(i) Twitter’s ranking (Twitter search “top” results), (ii) Most retweeted
tweet first ranking, and (iii) Most favorited tweet first ranking. Here a
bias value closer to +1.0 indicates democratic bias and a value closer to
−1.0 indicates republican bias.

the ranking system increased the republican bias of the input
by 0.18—to the point that it changed the polarity of the output bias making the final results republican (T OB = −0.11),
even though the average input bias had a democratic leaning.

It is important to note that, though the Twitter corpus has a
democratic-leaning bias, the input bias (TIB) of the different
queries varies across the spectrum (as shown in Table 7). This
variation is because each query acts as a filter to extract a subset of Twitter users whose tweets are relevant to that queries,
and the sets of users filtered out by different queries have differing biases. Therefore, athough the corpus bias of Twitter is
uniform, the specific query being considered determines the
input data set and hence the input bias, which in turn affects
the final output bias observed by the user.
The Power of the Ranking System

This change of polarity of bias via the ranking system is more
noticeable for some republican candidates. For instance, for
Chris Christie, Jeb Bush and Lindsey Graham, while the input bias was positive, indicating that more democratic leaning users tweeted about them, the ranking system switched
the leaning of the output results to republican. These shifts
in the bias caused by the ranking system (that can also result
in a polarity change), exhibit the ranking systems power in
altering the inherent bias of the input data.

The ranking biases in Table 7 show that while data has a major role in the search results’ bias, the ranking system still
plays a significant role by shifting the bias or even changing
its polarity. Comparing the output bias and the input bias for
the democratic and republican candidate queries reveals an
interesting discovery—on average, the ranking system shifts
the bias of each category towards that party’s leaning. For
democratic candidate queries, on average, the ranking system
enhanced the democratic bias of the input by 0.14, making the
output results more democratic (T OB = 0.52). On the other
hand, for queries related to republican candidates, on average,

The ranking of posts in social media search systems is influenced by a number of factors, including the content’s popularity (e.g., number of retweets or favorites), the author’s
popularity (e.g., number of followers or lists), as well as the
recency of the post. While our goal in this work is not to
reverse engineer Twitter’s ranking algorithm, we wanted to
gain some insight into the extent to which different factors
contribute to the overall observed bias. We, therefore, constructed rankings “solely” based on individual factors and examine the bias of these rankings. Table 8 shows the time averaged ranking bias of Twitter’s ranking, as well as, the bias

426

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

for two ranking strategies, each based on a single measure
of posts’ popularity, namely the number of retweets and the
number of favorites, respectively.

Output Bias (TOB)

1

Table 8 shows that the ranking biases of the three strategies
are quite similar to each other, indicating that popularity of
the post can explain much of the observed bias in Twitter’s
ranking. For instance, for Chris Christie, Jeb Bush and Lindsey Graham, even though most of the users tweeting about
them are democratic leaning (as shown by positive T IB values in Table 7), most of the popular tweets about them are
made by republican leaning users (as shown by the negative
T RB values for popularity based ranking strategies in Table 8). However, in some cases like Martin O’Malley, John
Kasich, democratic debate and #republicandebate, the difference in the T RB values between Twitter’s ranking and the
popularity based rankings indicate that, while popularity of
posts is a factor that could explain a large part of the observed
bias in Twitter search results, there are probably other factors
that contribute to the overall bias of the search results. Note
that the above experiment is just a first step towards unpacking the influence of the different factors on the overall bias of
search results in a social media like Twitter, and we defer a
more in-depth analysis for the future.

0.5
0
-0.5

Jim-Gilmore

George-Pataki

Rick-Santorum

Lindsey-Graham

John-Kasich

Mike-Huckabee

Rand-Paul

Carly-Fiorina

Jeb-Bush

Ben-Carson

Chris-Christie

Ted-Cruz

Marco-Rubio

Donald-Trump

-1

Figure 3: The time averaged output bias T OB in Twitter “top” search
results for the Republican candidates – candidates are listed left to right
from highest to lowest popularity.

In Figure 3, we plotted the output bias for the search results of
republican candidates ranked by their popularity to examine
if there is a correlation between the popularity of a candidate
and his output bias.7 The negative slope of the line of best fit
in Figure 3 supports the observation that the more popular a
candidate is, the more is the opposing perspective reflected in
his or her top search results.

RQ2b: The Collective Contribution of the Input Data and

This situation may be undesirable for popular candidates, especially if users from the opposite perspective are more likely
to speak negatively about the candidate. We illustrate this
case using Table 9, which shows tweets randomly sampled
from the set of tweets posted by users with an opposing polarity when compared to the candidate. These tweets were
included in the top search results for the queries Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, and they all either criticize or attempt
to ridicule the candidates. If an unbiased and potentially undecided voter searches for information about a popular presidential candidate, she would very likely see negative tweets
posted by users of opposing leaning about the candidate. Similar to the findings of [8], this situation can be undesirable for
the candidates as these negative tweets may impact the perceptions of these undecided voters.

the Ranking System

Given the impact of the input data and the influence of the
ranking system on the bias of Twitter search results, we were
curious to explore the dynamics between the input data and
the ranking system when producing the output bias. While
Table 7 shows a variance of output biases across the queries
as a result of the interplay between the two, we particularly
looked for the cases where the resulting output bias could affect a user’s search experience noticeably. Below, we describe
two of these cases by first analyzing the output bias and then
exploring the input data’s and the ranking system’s contribution to the resulting output bias for each of these cases.
The Case of Popular Candidates
Examining the Output Bias: Comparing the output bias of
the candidates in Table 7, we found a noticeable trend in the
output bias of popular candidates compared to the rest of the
candidates with the same political leaning – the search results
for the more popular candidates have a higher bias towards
the opposing perspective.6 For instance, the top search results for Hillary Clinton, the most popular democratic candidate during this time, contained fewer democratic results
(T OB = 0.21) than the search results for other democratic
candidates. Similarly, the search results for the query “Donald Trump”, the most popular republican candidate during
this time, contained fewer republican results (T OB = 0.29)
when compared to the search results of other republican candidates. Therefore, if a user searches for popular candidate
names in Twitter search, the top results have much higher bias
toward the opposing perspective, while this is not as extreme
for the less popular candidates.

The Contribution of Different Sources of Bias: Given the
differing output bias trend for popular candidates compared
to other candidates and the potential side effects, we explored
if this differential output bias is inherent in the input tweets
made by Twitter users or if it results from the ranking algorithm. To understand this, we compared the input and output
bias for the queries Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. We
found that the input bias for these queries leaned towards the
opposite political view (similar to what we found in the output
bias), indicating that the twitter users who talk about popular
candidates are likely from the opposite political leaning than
users who talk about the less popular candidates.

6
The popularity of a candidate is estimated from the polling data
obtained from [33] for December 2015.

7
We did not perform this test for democratic candidates because
there were only three of them.

However, the manner in which the ranking system altered the
input to produce the output and accordingly its bias was different for the two most popular candidates. While Hillary
Clinton is discussed by republican users more than the other

427

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

Randomly selected tweets from ‘Hillary Clinton’ search results,
which are posted by a republican leaning user
WT: Watchdog wants federal ethics probe of Clinton, possible improprieties http://bit.ly/1NvlrPA
The Clintons both Bill and Hillary have a very long history of framing
others while they commit the Crimes. History has destroyed the proof
@CarlyFiorina: @realDonaldTrump is a big Christmas gift wrapped
up under the tree for @HillaryClinton. [url]
@CNN @HillaryClinton @BernieSanders hell no shes a murderer
pic.twitter.com/zGQwR7dLZj
I dont care if youre a Democrat or Republican, how can you trust a
word Hillary Clinton says and how can you consider voting for her??

Randomly selected tweets from ‘Donald Trump’ search results,
which are posted by a democratic leaning user
Williamsburg, #Brooklyn Dec 15 #trump2016 #MussoliniGrumpycat #MakeAmericaHateAgain #DonaldTrump @realDonaldTrump
pic.twitter.com/Hj6DC7M7V1
Scotland defeats Trump on clean energy. Hopefully hell have a lot of
time for golfing soon [url]
Dirty little secret: Donald Trump is not a good debater.
http://MLive.com - Where Donald Trumps Michigan campaign donations come from http://ow.ly/39hCWt
Enjoy the sweet music of Donald Trump in Carol of the Trumps [url]

Table 9: Randomly selected tweets from the search results for the queries Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, which are posted by a user with an
opposite bias as compared to the candidate.

democratic candidates (T IB = 0.03), the ranking system
mitigated this undesirable situation by increasing the democratic output bias of the search results by a factor of seven as
compared to the input bias. That is, the ranking system directed the search results for Hillary Clinton towards the perspective of her own party. For Donald Trump the situation
is the opposite. More democratic leaning users tweet about
him (T IB = 0.19) than the other republican candidates, and
the ranking system enhanced this input bias resulting in more
democratic tweets in the output search results. So, while the
ranking system mitigated the opposite bias in the search results for Hillary Clinton, it enhanced it for Donald Trump.

the output bias for the queries related to the event democratic
debate (e.g., democratic debate vs #democraticdebate).
The Contribution of Different Sources of Bias: To understand the sources of these differences between the output bias
of similarly phrased queries, we compared the contributions
of the input data and the ranking system to their output bias.
As seen in Table 7, the input data contributes more to the
output bias for similarly phrased queries. In a few cases,
however, the ranking system affects the input data noticeably,
leading to two similarly phrased queries with similar input biases to have search results with very different output biases.
For example, comparison of the biases of the queries republican debate (T IB = 0.27) and rep debate (T IB = 0.40)
reveals that while the input bias for these queries is similar,
the ranking system altered their bias in opposing directions.
That is, while the ranking system increased the bias of the
republican debate query by 0.26 making it more democratic,
it decreased the bias of the rep debate query by 0.09, making it more republican. Even when the input bias of these
two queries was similar, the ranking system made one query
significantly more democratic than the other. This example
illustrates the influence a search system exerts on the input
data, by curating search results with different biases for two
similar queries with similar input biases.

This means that if a user searches for most popular candidates from each political party, the results favor Hillary Clinton over Donald Trump, while this was not the case in the
input data. These opposing dynamics between the input data
and the ranking system, while inadvertent, can have serious
implications, especially for the candidate for whom the ranking system enhanced the view points of the opposite leaning
users.
Different Phrasings of Similar Queries
Examining the Output Bias: Different users who seek information about a certain topic might phrase their queries
differently; e.g., for the event republican debate, the queries
could be republican debate, rep debate, #republicandebate
or #gopdebate. While these differently phrased queries refer to the exact same event, the search results might differ
substantially, particularly in the situation when users of different leanings selectively use different keywords and hashtags in their tweets to refer to the same event. This difference in search results for slightly differently phrased queries
is common in many search engines, but whether the results
for these similar queries exhibit different political biases is an
open question.

These examples illustrate the interplay between the input data
and the ranking system which produces different output biases for similarly phrased queries and for queries on popular
political candidate. These observations lead to new questions
for search engine design: How do these complex interactions between the input data and the ranking system affect the
users’ search experience and how can we make users aware of
these effects? In the next section, we briefly discuss solutions
for signaling bias in search results to the users.
DISCUSSION

To answer this question, in Table 7, we compare the output biases of similarly phrased queries referring to the same event.
We found that the output bias of two similar search queries
for the same event can differ noticeably. For example, the
output results for the query republican debate have approximately twice the democratic leaning bias (T OB = 0.53)
as compared to the the output bias of the query rep debate
(T OB = 0.31). Similar noticeable differences also exist in

Generalizability of the Bias Quantification Framework

Extending to other search engines: Our proposed framework can be applied to other search engines (e.g., web search
engines, other social media search engines) to quantify the
bias in the search results even if the search algorithm hides
within a black box and the internal details of the retrieval and
ranking algorithms are not known (which is almost always

428

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

lenging, specially because the trade-off point is likely to be
domain and user specific. Additionally, including bias as a
factor in the ranking systems might lead to a degradation of
the top search results along relevancy, popularity, recency, or
other metrics.

the case for real-world proprietary search engines). The only
pre-requisite for applying the framework is that a methodology for measuring the bias of individual data items (e.g.,
web-pages, tweets) is available.
Our bias quantification framework (shown in Figure 1) works
well for social media search, where it is possible to separate
the contributions of the input data and the ranking algorithm
to the final output bias. However, in many modern-day IR
systems, data items in the corpus are directly ranked based
on their relevance to the query, without generating any intermediate set of relevant items. In such systems, it is hard
to disentangle the bias introduced by the input data from the
bias added by the ranking process. But, we can still compare
the relative biases of different ranking systems, under the assumption that both operate upon similar data corpora. For
instance, the ranking algorithms of Bing and Google search
could be compared with each other by observing their output
biases for the same set of queries.

Making bias transparent: Given the aforementioned problems with changing the ranking of the search results, an alternative method of addressing the bias can be to incorporate the
bias into the front-end of the search engine (by visualizing the
bias of search result), rather than into the ranking algorithm
itself. Through this method, while the search algorithm’s efficiency is not compromised, users can be made aware of the
possible biases in their search results by marking each search
result with its political bias. Such a nudging practice has been
used widely in the literature for purposes like delivering multiple aspects of news in social media [30] and encouraging
reading of diverse political opinions [27, 28].
A hybrid approach of the above two methods could also be
proposed, which not only shows the bias of each search result, but also separates the results of the two political perspectives (republican and democratic) and shows them as distinct
ranked lists, with each distinct list retaining the ranking of
the results in the original ranked list. By preserving the original search engine’s ranking within each list, this methodology
ensures that the quality of the top search results does not degrade across other metrics such as relevance, popularity, and
recency.

Extending to multiple perspectives scenario: Even though
we have applied our quantification framework for a twoperspective scenario of US politics, our framework can be
extended to multiple perspectives by having a bias vector for
each item, rather than a scalar score as we have now. For instance, if the search scenario under consideration has p different perspectives associated with each query (such as queries
related to a political election contested by p political parties),
then each data item (e.g., a tweet) can be represented as a pdimensional bias vector. Formally, the bias vector for the i-th
data item would be given by Vi = [vi1 , vi2 ,..., vip ], where vij
gives a measure of how biased the i-th data item is along the
j-th perspective, with values in the range of [−1, 1]. A value
of vij = 1 indicates that the item supports the j-th perspective, vij = −1 indicates that the item opposes the perspective,
whereas vij = 0 indicates that the item is neutral with respect
to that perspective. Then Equations 2 to 5 can be converted to
their vector addition formulations, to measure the input, output and ranking biases. A challenging aspect of extending to
a p-dimensional scenario would be to develop a methodology
to capture these bias vectors, and it would be interesting to
explore this in the future.

Developing tools to signal political bias in search results, and
conducting user studies to understand how users interact with
such alternative search interface designs are important, and
are left for future work.
Auditing Black Boxes

Recently, the rise of algorithmic platforms’ influence on
users’ online experience has motivated many studies to audit these platforms and understand their biases. While some
of these algorithmic systems’ functionalities are open to the
public, making the auditing process easier, most of them are
not. The walls of intellectual proprietary, high complexity of
these algorithms and the perils of gaming a system via malicious users put these algorithms in a black box, making it
almost infeasible to have access to an algorithm’s specifications from outside, like in our study. While we know about a
few general factors that a search engines takes into account in
curating the search results (such as relevancy, popularity, and
recency), there are hundreds of other features that are hidden
in a blackbox, preventing us as researchers from being able
to pin-point the exact feature(s) of the algorithm which might
be leading to the bias being introduced in the search results.

Signaling Political Bias in Search Results

While our analyses show that social media search results have
varying amounts of political bias, how this bias can be tackled
is still an open question. In this section, we briefly discuss
some potential solutions to this question, but their in-depth
exploration is left for future work.
Incorporating Bias into the Ranking System: One solution
for controlling bias could be to develop a ranking mechanism
that considers bias as a metric and trades-off relevance and
bias of the search results. For instance, a minimal value of
average bias of the search results could be achieved by interleaving results from the various perspectives of a search
query, using methods similar to those proposed to inject diversity in search results [45, 49]. However, finding a suitable
equilibrium between bias and other ranking factors is chal-

Therefore, building on previous studies that have adopted this
“black box” view for an algorithmic system while auditing
it [4, 9, 14, 15, 20], we characterized the bias of the ranking
algorithm in Twitter’s search platform, without knowing its
internals. Our proposed auditing framework can help users,
system designers and researchers to become aware of possible biases of a search process, while they might not be aware
of the details of the process itself. For users, this awareness

429

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

hope to pursue this in the future. Another limiting factor in
our study was using the simplifying assumption of considering a user as either neutral, pro-democratic or pro-republican.
Under this assumption we can not have a user who is partially
both pro-republican and pro-democrat. However, we should
clarify that for doing this classification, we still considered
two scores for each user, one the similarity to republicans and
the other similarity to democrats. Currently to give the user
a final leaning, we consider the difference of these similarities. However, in the future, we can use these two similarities
to determine the extent to which a user is pro-democratic as
well as pro-republican to have a more nuanced view of political leanings of users. And lastly, while we have discussed
some potential solutions for signaling political bias in search
results, we have not as yet implemented our proposed solutions and evaluated the effect of this signaling on the users’
search experience. This exploration would be a good follow
up of our current study.

can result in more intelligent use of a system, knowing that
their search results can be far from neutral in some cases. For
system designers, such auditing platforms can be used to investigate the algorithm’s specifications, particularly when the
bias has been introduced by the algorithm and not the system
input. And finally, researchers and watchdog organizations
can actively utilize such auditing platforms to measure bias
and compare it among different search platforms, making the
research community and the system designers aware of potentially misleading biases.
Distinguishing the Sources of Bias: From Development
to Design

Our study has proposed a first step towards distinguishing the
different sources of bias in a search engine. The observation that a significant part of the bias comes from the input
data in some cases (without the interference of the ranking
system) highlights the need to add data-driven perspective to
algorithm audit studies, such that not only the output data is
observed to understand the algorithm’s discriminatory or biased behavior, but also the potential biases in the input data
are investigated.

CONCLUSION

To our knowledge, the present study developed the first
framework to quantify bias of ranked results in a search
process, while being able to distinguish between different
sources of bias. Via this ability, our framework not only measures the bias in the output ranked list of search results, but
is also able to capture how much of this bias is due to the biased set of input data to the ranking system and how much is
contributed by the ranking system itself. In the earlier search
engine bias studies, these two factors have not been separated
out. Our analyses revealed the significant effect of both input data and the ranking algorithm in producing considerable
bias in Twitter search results based on various factors such as
the topic of a query or how the query is phrased.

Although a part of the output bias stems from the input data,
our study revealed that an algorithm can influence the inherent bias of the input data significantly, to the extent of even
changing its polarity. This algorithmic power is of great importance particularly when a design choice in the interface
gives higher visibility to the algorithm’s results than the input
data. Twitter search, for example, provides users with “top”
and “live” search results, where the former is the ranked list
of tweets output by the search system and the latter is simply
all the tweets containing the search query in reverse chronological order, i.e. the input data. This means that a user looking for information about a topic is able to see both the input
data (which might be more representative of the full Twitter
data) and the output data in Twitter search if she wants. However, to give people more relevant results in a shorter amount
of time, Twitter has made the top results (the ranking systems’s output) the default option rather than the live results
(the input data). This design choice, while legitimate, gives
the ranked results more visibility, making the output bias and
accordingly the ranking system’s influence more highlighted
than the input bias in the design. These design choices, along
with the significant effect of ranking system on the final output search bias, suggest a new avenue of research for studying
when and how the influence of the ranking system (particularly when it is more visible in the design), might result in
showing a totally different side of a story to a user than what
the input data would show to her.

As more and more users are relying on social media search
to follow live events and news on personalities [40], the varying biases in search results can have significant impact on the
impression that users form about the different events and personalities [8, 29]. We end by calling for mechanisms to make
users more aware of the potential biases in search results, e.g.,
by presenting the results in a way that makes the different
perspectives transparent to the user. Giving the users more
control over the bias beyond just making them more aware
of its existence could be a potential next step. For example,
users could be given controls or filters to re-rank the search
results to adjust for search biases – just as they can in ranking
of products and services on sites like Amazon or Yelp.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was funded in part by NSF grant CHS-1564041.
REFERENCES

LIMITATIONS

1. Lada A. Adamic and Natalie Glance. 2005. The Political
Blogosphere and the 2004 U.S. Election: Divided They
Blog. In Proc. LinkKDD.

In this study, we focussed on a limited set of queries that
were either related to a political event or a political candidate, due to the limitation on the number of queries we could
submit via Twitter API. Given the variation of bias over different queries, we believe extending our query set to more
general political queries on controversial topics such as gun
control and abortion would strengthen our analysis, and we

2. Solon Barocas and Andrew D Selbst. 2014. Big data’s
disparate impact. Available at SSRN 2477899 (2014).
3. Parantapa Bhattacharya, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Niloy
Ganguly, Saptarshi Ghosh, and Krishna P. Gummadi.

430

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

16. Alex Hern. 2015. Flickr faces complaints over
‘offensive’ auto-tagging for photos.
http://tinyurl.com/Flickr-AutoTagging. (2015).

2014. Inferring User Interests in the Twitter Social
Network. In Proc. ACM RecSys.
4. Le Chen, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2015.
Peeking beneath the hood of uber. In In Proc. of the
2015 ACM Conference on Internet Measurement
Conference. ACM, 495–508.

17. Itai Himelboim, Stephen McCreery, and Marc Smith.
2013. Birds of a feather tweet together: Integrating
network and content analyses to examine cross-ideology
exposure on Twitter. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 18, 2 (2013), 40–60.

5. M. Conover, B. Gonçalves, J. Ratkiewicz, A. Flammini,
and F. Menczer. 2011a. Predicting the Political
Alignment of Twitter Users. In Proc. IEEE SocialCom.

18. Chloe Kliman-Silver, Aniko Hannak, David Lazer,
Christo Wilson, and Alan Mislove. 2015. Location,
Location, Location: The Impact of Geolocation on Web
Search Personalization. In Proc. ACM IMC.

6. M. Conover, J. Ratkiewicz, Matthew Francisco, B
Gonçalves, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini. 2011b.
Political Polarization on Twitter. In Proc. AAAI ICWSM.

19. Danai Koutra, Paul N. Bennett, and Eric Horvitz. 2015.
Events and Controversies: Influences of a Shocking
News Event on Information Seeking. In Proc. WWW.

7. Amit Datta, Michael Carl Tschantz, and Anupam Datta.
2014. Automated Experiments on Ad Privacy Settings:
A Tale of Opacity, Choice, and Discrimination. Choice,
and Discrimination. arXiv. org (2014).

20. Q Vera Liao, Wai-Tat Fu, and Markus Strohmaier. 2016.
# Snowden: Understanding Biases Introduced by
Behavioral Differences of Opinion Groups on Social
Media. In In Proc. of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM,
3352–3363.

8. Robert Epstein and Ronald E. Robertson. 2015. The
search engine manipulation effect (SEME) and its
possible impact on the outcomes of elections. Proc. of
the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) 112, 33
(2015), E4512–E4521.

21. Joseph Lichterman. 2010. New Pew data: More
Americans are getting news on Facebook and Twitter.
(2010). http://tinyurl.com/News-on-Social-Media.

9. Motahhare Eslami, Aimee Rickman, Kristen Vaccaro,
Amirhossein Aleyasen, Andy Vuong, Karrie Karahalios,
Kevin Hamilton, and Christian Sandvig. 2015. I always
assumed that I wasn’t really that close to [her]:
Reasoning about Invisible Algorithms in News Feeds. In
In Proc. of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 153–162.

22. Zhe Liu and Ingmar Weber. 2014. Is Twitter a public
sphere for online conflicts? A cross-ideological and
cross-hierarchical look. In International Conference on
Social Informatics. Springer, 336–347.

10. USA Executive Office of the President. 2016. Big Data:
A Report on Algorithmic Systems, Opportunity,and
Civil Rights. http://tinyurl.com/Big-Data-White-House.
(2016).

23. Aibek Makazhanov and Davood Rafiei. 2013. Predicting
Political Preference of Twitter Users. In Proc. ASONAM.
24. Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and
Hinrich Schutze. 2008. Introduction to Information
Retrieval. Cambridge University Press.

11. S. Fortunato, A. Flammini, F. Menczer, and A.
Vespignani. 2006. Topical interests and the mitigation of
search engine bias. Proc. of the National Academy of
Sciences (PNAS) 103, 34 (2006), 12684–12689.

25. Amy Mitchell and Dana Page. 2015. The Evolving Role
of News on Twitter and Facebook. Pew Research Center
(2015).

12. Saptarshi Ghosh, Naveen Sharma, Fabricio Benevenuto,
Niloy Ganguly, and Krishna Gummadi. 2012. Cognos:
Crowdsourcing Search for Topic Experts in Microblogs.
In Proc. ACM SIGIR.

26. Abbe Mowshowitz and Akira Kawaguchi. 2005.
Measuring search engine bias. Information Processing
and Management 41, 5 (2005), 1193–1205.

13. Jennifer Golbeck and Derek Hansen. 2011. Computing
Political Preference Among Twitter Followers. In ACM
SIGCHI.

27. Sean A Munson, Stephanie Y Lee, and Paul Resnick.
2013. Encouraging Reading of Diverse Political
Viewpoints with a Browser Widget.. In ICWSM.

14. Aniko Hannak, Piotr Sapiezynski, Arash
Molavi Kakhki, Balachander Krishnamurthy, David
Lazer, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2013.
Measuring Personalization of Web Search. In Proc.
WWW.

28. Sean A Munson and Paul Resnick. 2010. Presenting
diverse political opinions: how and how much. In In
Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in
computing systems. ACM, 1457–1466.
29. Bing Pan, Helene Hembrooke, Thorsten Joachims, Lori
Lorigo, Geri Gay, and Laura Granka. 2007. In Google
We Trust: Users’ Decisions on Rank, Position, and
Relevance. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 12 (2007), 801–823. Issue 3.

15. Aniko Hannak, Gary Soeller, David Lazer, Alan
Mislove, and Christo Wilson. 2014. Measuring price
discrimination and steering on e-commerce web sites. In
In Proc. of the 2014 conference on internet measurement
conference. ACM, 305–318.

431

Session: Politics, Party, Policy, & Participation

CSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA

40. Jaime Teevan, Daniel Ramage, and Merredith Ringel
Morris. 2011. #TwitterSearch: a comparison of
microblog search and web search. In Proc. ACM WSDM.

30. Souneil Park, Seungwoo Kang, Sangyoung Chung, and
Junehwa Song. 2009. NewsCube: delivering multiple
aspects of news to mitigate media bias. In Proc. ACM
CHI.

41. Elizabeth Van Couvering. 2010. Search engine bias: the
structuration of traffic on the World-Wide Web. Ph.D.
Dissertation. The London School of Economics and
Political Science.

31. Pew Research 2013. Twitter Reaction to Events Often at
Odds with Overall Public Opinion.
http://www.pewresearch.org/2013/03/04/twitterreaction-to-events-often-at-odds-with-overall-publicopinion/.
(2013).

42. Liwen Vaughan and Mike Thelwall. 2004. Search
Engine Coverage Bias: Evidence and Possible Causes.
Information Processing and Management 40, 4 (May
2004), 693–707.
43. Ingmar Weber, Venkata Rama Kiran Garimella, and Erik
Borra. 2012. Mining Web Query Logs to Analyze
Political Issues. In Proc. ACM WebSci.

32. Matthew Purver and Sylwester Karolina. 2015. Twitter
Language Use Reflects Psychological Differences
between Democrats and Republicans. PLoS ONE 10, 9
(2015), e0137422.
33. Real Clear Politics 2015. RealClearPolitics – Election
2016 – 2016 Republican Presidential Nomination.
http://tinyurl.com/us-republican-polling-data. (2015).

44. Ingmar Weber, Venkata Rama Kiran Garimella, and
Asmelash Teka. 2013. Political hashtag trends. In
European Conference on Information Retrieval.
Springer, 857–860.

34. Christian Sandvig, Kevin Hamilton, Karrie Karahalios,
and Cedric Langbort. 2014. Auditing algorithms:
Research methods for detecting discrimination on
internet platforms. Data and Discrimination:
Converting Critical Concerns into Productive Inquiry
(2014).

45. Michael J. Welch, Junghoo Cho, and Christopher
Olston. 2011. Search Result Diversity for Informational
Queries. In Proc. WWW.
46. Tae Yano, Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
Shedding (a Thousand Points of) Light on Biased
Language. In Proc NAACL HLT Workshop on Creating
Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (CSLDAMT).

35. Bryan C Semaan, Scott P Robertson, Sara Douglas, and
Misa Maruyama. 2014. Social media supporting
political deliberation across multiple public spheres:
towards depolarization. In In Proc. of the 17th ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work &
social computing. ACM, 1409–1421.

47. Sarita Yardi and Danah Boyd. 2010. Dynamic debates:
An analysis of group polarization over time on twitter.
Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 30, 5 (2010),
316–327.

36. Naveen Sharma, Saptarshi Ghosh, Fabricio Benevenuto,
Niloy Ganguly, and Krishna Gummadi. 2012. Inferring
Who-is-Who in the Twitter Social Network. In Proc.
ACM WOSN.

48. Emine Yilmaz and Javed A. Aslam. 2006. Estimating
Average Precision with Incomplete and Imperfect
Judgments. In Proc. ACM CIKM.

37. Laura M Smith, Linhong Zhu, Kristina Lerman, and
Zornitsa Kozareva. 2013. The role of social media in the
discussion of controversial topics. In Social Computing
(SocialCom), 2013 International Conference on. IEEE,
236–243.

49. Elad Yom-Tov, Susan Dumais, and Qi Guo. 2013.
Promoting Civil Discourse Through Search Engine
Diversity. Social Science Computer Review 32 (2013),
145–154. Issue 2.
50. Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Krishna P. Gummadi, and
Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil. 2016. Message
Impartiality in Social Media Discussions. In Proc. AAAI
ICWSM.

38. Latanya Sweeney. 2013. Discrimination in online ad
delivery. Queue 11, 3 (2013), 10.
39. Herman Tavani. 2014. Search Engines and Ethics. In
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (spring 2014
ed.), Edward N. Zalta (Ed.).

51. Daniel Xiaodan Zhou, Paul Resnick, and Qiaozhu Mei.
2011. Classifying the Political Leaning of News Articles
and Users from User Votes. In Proc. AAAI ICWSM.

432

