IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 56, NO. 3, AUGUST 2013

287

White-Box or Black-Box Decision Tree Algorithms:
Which to Use in Education?
Boris Delibašić, Member, IEEE, Milan Vukićević, Miloš Jovanović, and Milija Suknović

Abstract—University students are usually taught data mining
through black-box data mining algorithms, which hide the algorithm’s details from the user and optionally allow parameter
adjustment. This minimizes the effort required to use these algorithms. On the other hand, white-box algorithms reveal the
algorithm’s structure, allowing users to assemble algorithms from
algorithm building blocks. This paper provides a comparison
between students’ acceptance of both black-box and white-box
decision tree algorithms. For these purposes, the technology
acceptance model is used. The model is extended with perceived
understanding and the influence it has on acceptance of decision
tree algorithms. An experiment was conducted with 118 senior
management students who were divided into two groups—one
working with black-box, and the other with white-box algorithms—and their cognitive styles were analyzed. The results
of how cognitive styles affect the perceived understanding of
students when using decision tree algorithms with different levels
of algorithm transparency are reported here.
Index Terms—Algorithms, decision support systems, decision
trees, open-source software, student experiments.

I. INTRODUCTION

The WB approach reveals more algorithm details than the
BB approach and, in addition, allows users to assemble algorithms by putting algorithm building blocks together. In [8], it
was shown that WB decision tree algorithms can outperform
famous BB algorithms on a variety of datasets. However, this
higher algorithm transparency increases the complexity of the
system due to the increased number of user options. In the same
paper, several BB decision tree algorithms were analyzed, and a
generic decision tree structure was proposed that can reproduce
famous BB decision trees and allow the creation of even more
new WB algorithms by exchanging parts of BB algorithms. The
same authors propose a generic structure that consists of subproblems that must be solved to make an algorithm work (e.g., to
decide what evaluation measure should be used for splits evaluation). Many algorithmic components, also known as reusable
components (RCs), are available for solving the subproblems
(e.g., gain ratio or gini index can be used for the evaluating
split subproblem). By combining reusable components (algorithm building blocks) through subproblems, a plethora of algorithms can be designed.
II. BACKGROUND

T

HE INCREASING use of data mining in industry has created a need for good quality courses on this topic for undergraduate and graduate students [1]. Data mining courses are
usually focused on teaching the whole data mining process[2]
or on the application and implementation of data mining algorithms [3]. Popular data mining books [4], [5] concentrate on
presenting black-box algorithms, without identifying algorithm
building blocks for white-box algorithms. This paper examines
the difference between students’ acceptance of black-box and
white-box decision tree algorithms.
The experiment was performed on the open-source
data-mining platform Rapid Miner [6], which includes
black-box (BB) decision tree algorithms. For the
white-box (WB) approach, a plug-in for Rapid Miner was
used [7].
The BB approach enables users to use predefined algorithms
to set parameters and retrieve models that help them detect regularities (patterns) in data. This facilitates use since the algorithm’s details remain hidden from the user.

Manuscript received September 15, 2011; revised June 03, 2012; accepted
August 20, 2012. Date of publication October 11, 2012; date of current version
July 31, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Serbian Ministry of Science and Technological Development, Project ID III 47003, under a grant.
The authors are with the Faculty of Organizational Sciences, University of
Belgrade, Belgrade 11000, Serbia (e-mail: boris.delibasic@fon.bg.ac.rs; milan.
vukicevic@fon.bg.ac.rs; milos.jovanovic@fon.bg.ac.rs; milija.suknovic@fon.
bg.ac.rs).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TE.2012.2217342

The students’ acceptance of decision tree algorithms as
described in this paper was modeled with the popular Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [9], as well an extended
TAM model [10]. TAM includes five constructs: perceived
usefulness (PU), perceived ease of use (PEOU), attitude toward
use (ATU), intention to use (ITU), and actual system use. The
key determinants of technology acceptance are the belief that
the computer system will help improve job performance (PU)
and the belief that the computer is easy to use (PEOU). These
two determinants are considered to be the basis for evaluating
the attitudes toward using particular computer systems and
ultimately generating the intention to use. The intention to use
then leads to actual end-user behavior.
In addition to testing PU, PEOU, ATU, and ITU, perceived
understanding (PUND) was used to extend the original TAM
model because [11] showed that PUND had a positive impact
on user’s acceptance, and also because BB and WB approaches
vary in the level of openness, with WB considered being the
more open.
Users’ interaction with decision trees was previously researched in [12], where the accuracy, response time, and
confidence of users working with comprehensible models (decision tables, decision trees, and rule-based predictive models)
were analyzed. In [13], an interactive decision tree classifier
was used to show that experts could be involved interactively in
building decision tree models. A pilot study in [14] investigated
how users interacted with machine learning systems.

0018-9359/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE

288

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 56, NO. 3, AUGUST 2013

The openness of systems has always been an interesting research topic. The author of [15] investigated marketing decision
support systems, analyzing the influence that openness has on
mental model quality, experience, decision confidence, and intensity of use. It was shown that openness decreases the reliance
effect, but does not influence the decision makers’ evaluation of
their decision. In [11], it is shown that transparency (openness)
has a positive impact on user’s trust and user’s acceptance of a
content-based art recommender.
TAM has been widely used in modeling the acceptance of
management information systems in education. Students’ acceptance of ERP systems was discussed in [16], the acceptance
of technology in education was modeled in [17], and an e-collaboration technology acceptance model among management
students was proposed in [18].
Currently, there are no acceptance models for data mining education available in the literature; this paper proposes acceptance models for both BB and WB decision trees.

Fig. 1. White-box algorithms design and parameter setup.

TABLE I
STUDENTS’ SCORES

ON ACCEPTANCE MODEL ITEMS FOR THE
AND WB APPROACHES

BB

III. EXPERIMENTAL SETTING
The 118 participants in the experiment were senior-year
business administration students who had taken a course in
Business Intelligence (BI). The 14-week course consisted of
2 h of lectures and 2 h of practical exercises per week and had
been offered, in a similar form, over an eight-year period. In
chronological order, the topics covered were the following:
decision support systems, collaboration systems, data warehousing, data mining, case-based reasoning, and knowledge
management. Each topic lasted for two weeks, except for data
warehousing and data mining, which each took three weeks.
The experiment was performed in the weeks following the data
mining part of the course. It was noticed that this particular
part of the course was hard for students to grasp, as they had
difficulty with data preprocessing, choosing the right algorithm
and setting its parameters, and analyzing the models produced
from algorithms.
The students were set the task of searching for the most accurate decision tree algorithm in 15 trials. All students worked
with the Hayes Roth dataset available from UCI [19]; in both
the BB and WB approach, the accuracy of the best algorithm
was the same. The chosen dataset was fairly simple (160 instances, four categorical attributes, and one class attribute with
three classes) and was chosen because it is easy for students to
understand, produces fairly different decision trees for different
algorithm parameters, and has a mixed attribute type.
Before the experiment started, students working with the BB
approach were shown how to use the C4.5 decision tree; those
working with the WB approach were shown how to design an algorithm of their own. Students subsequently received user manuals that helped them to understand the algorithm parameters
and algorithm building blocks.
Students working with BB algorithms (BB students) could
choose between three algorithms (C4.5, CART, and CHAID)
and set their parameters. Students working with WB algorithms
(WB students) had to design algorithms and set the parameters
of the algorithm building blocks through the WB decision tree
designer interface shown in Fig. 1.

Each button on the left-hand panel represents a subproblem.
When a subproblem is selected, the upper central panel shows
the RCs available for solving it and allows users to select and
save one or more of these. The lower central panel shows the
parameters for the selected RCs.
The right-hand panel documents the designed generic tree
algorithm (the selected RCs and their parameters).
The top panel contains options for creating new WB algorithms, saving current ones, or opening existing ones.
IV. RESULTS AND EVALUATION
The questionnaire contained in total 21 items measured on a
1–7-point Likert-like scale. The questionnaire and user manuals
used for the experiment are available at whibo.fon.bg.ac.rs/
joomla/images/stories/downloads/the-whibo-experiment.pdf.
PUND was measured with items adapted from [16], where PU,
PEOU, ATU, and ITU was measured with items adapted from
TAM [9].
Of the BB students, 91.38% found the most accurate algorithm after the 15 trials, as compared to only 80% of the WB
students. This suggests that WB algorithms are more complex
to use.

DELIBAŠIĆ et al.: WHITE-BOX OR BLACK-BOX DECISION TREE ALGORITHMS

289

Fig. 2. Decision tree acceptance model for (left) BB and (right) WB.

,

,

.

Table I shows students’ scores in terms of the factors of the
acceptance model. No significant differences were found in any
of the factors, which is surprising given that WB decision trees
are more complex to use than BB decision trees. However, as
shown by [20], users are willing to use more complex models if
they understand their potential benefits.
Students’ cognitive styles were analyzed, and their effect on
the PUND scores reported. Cognitive style was tested using the
popular MBTI questionnaire [21] that includes 95 items with
four bipolar scales: Extraversion-Introversion, Sensing-Intuition, Thinking-Feeling, and Judging-Perception. Introverts are
oriented primarily to internal hints, and extroverts to external.
The sensing type pays most attention to what she/he can sense,
and the intuitive type relies mostly on inner feelings. Someone
with a thinking style makes assessments based on logical impersonal processes, while the feeling type makes assessments
based on personal, subjective processes. Judgers try to structure
and use models that allow decisions to be made quickly, while
perceivers keep options open with no concern for deadlines. A
student might fall entirely within one of these cognitive aspect
categories or straddle several categories.
BB students who were neither sensing nor intuitive (a total
of nine students) achieved a PUND of 3.28 (1.37), while WB
students with the same characteristics (13 students) achieved a
PUND of 4.62 (0.98). The difference was significant on a 0.05
level (
,
). Eta square for this finding
is 0.26, which is considered as a large effect size. Therefore,
students who are neither sensing nor intuitive should use WB.
Of the 60 WB students, 41 were judging, 14 perceiving, and 5
were neither judging nor perceiving. Judging students achieved
a PUND of 4.35 (std. dev. 1.17), while perceiving students had
an average of 5.29 (1.01). The difference was significant on a
0.05 level (
,
). Eta square for this finding
is 0.12, which can be considered as a medium effect size. Perceiving WB students will achieve significantly better PUND
than will judging students, a difference not seen with BB students or when comparing the WB and BB approach.
A partial least square (PLS) analysis was used for proposing
models that could predict the influences for students’ acceptance
of BB and WB decision trees. PLS was a convenient choice
for this study as the sample size was relatively small [10]. For
the analysis, SmartPLS software was used [22]. The proposed
models and their quality criteria are shown in Fig. 2 and Tables II
and III.

In Tables II and III, the original number of items is shown for
each factor, as well as the remaining items (only items that had
loadings higher than 0.8 were kept, which guarantees convergent validity). Cronbach’s alpha is greater than 0.7 for almost
all factors, except for PUND, but this is acceptable given that
Cronbach’s alpha can underestimate reliability in factors with
a small number of items. Composite reliability is greater than
0.8 for all factors. The average variance extracted (AVE) being
greater than 0.5 for all factors means that they all have a significant effect, which suggests the validity and discrimination of the
model is satisfactory. In both models, the Fornell–Larcker criterion is satisfied (square root of AVE is larger than any interfactor
correlations), which indicates sound discriminant validity.
For the BB model, the coefficient of determination
of the
dependent variable ITU is 0.449, showing a moderate strength
effect, whereas for the WB model, the
of the dependent variable ITU is 0.703, which can be considered as a substantial
strength effect.
shows the percentage of variance explained
in the model. These figures indicate that a good prediction can be
made of ITU, which is itself a good predictor of user acceptance.
Fig. 2 shows models for BB and WB decision tree acceptance.
Arrows show path coefficients (with t-values and significance
levels). The original TAM model is shown inside the bracketed
rectangle.
Based on the models, several observations can be made. In
BB decision trees, PUND had a positive impact on PU, PEOU,
and ITU. PU had positive impact on ATU, and ATU had positive
impact on ITU. Students who perceived that they had a better
understanding are more likely to find the system more useful and
easy to use and to accept it. It is interesting that PEOU had no
influence on ATU and that PU had no influence on ITU. PUND,
however, played a major role in acceptance of BB decision trees.
In WB decision trees, PUND had a positive impact only on
PEOU. PEOU had a positive impact on PU, and PU had a positive impact on ATU and ITU. ATU had a positive impact on
ITU. Here, students with greater understanding found it easier
to use. However, students who found WB decision trees useful
were more likely to accept the systems.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed models for BB and WB decision tree
acceptance among management students. As data mining algorithms are usually the hardest topic for students in a BI course,
an analysis was made of whether more open algorithms would

290

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON EDUCATION, VOL. 56, NO. 3, AUGUST 2013

TABLE II
QUALITY CRITERIA OF BB ACCEPTANCE MODEL

TABLE III
QUALITY CRITERIA OF WB ACCEPTANCE MODEL

improve their acceptance by students. It is shown that perceived
understanding had a positive impact on students accepting BB
decision trees. While PUND did not play a major role in accepting WB systems, PU had a positive impact on accepting
WB decision trees. It seems that the BB and WB approaches
are complementary, as students tend to accept BB decision trees
if they perceive to understand the algorithm structure. On the
other hand, students tend to accept the WB system if they find
it useful.

The recommendation for lecturers teaching BB decision
trees would be to make a greater effort to explain the algorithm
structure better to students, perhaps by using WB decision trees
as a tool. When using WB trees, students should be carefully
taught how to use the system and shown the benefits such a
system could provide.
This paper has shown how PUND depends on a student’s
cognitive style. This finding might suggest dividing students
into groups for learning (by the BB or WB approach). Lecturers

DELIBAŠIĆ et al.: WHITE-BOX OR BLACK-BOX DECISION TREE ALGORITHMS

291

should recommend the WB approach to students who are neither sensing nor intuitive, and they can expect that judging and
perceiving types of students will probably have a significantly
different level of PUND if using the WB approach.
Although WB decision trees are more complex, students perceived that these algorithms were easy to use; this probably has
to do with the findings in [20], where it was shown that users
are willing to use more complex models if they understand their
benefits.
This study has several limitations. Experiments were performed on business major students; it would be more interesting
to do the experiment with computer science/engineering undergraduate students (since the WhiBo platform offers an easily
extendable structure for the design and implementation of new
algorithms [7]). Another limitation is that, in the TAM model,
only PUND was analyzed as an external factor. The influence of
MBTI factors on PUND was also analyzed without taking into
account other potential confounding factors.

[15] N. Demoulin, “Marketing decision support system openness: A means
of improving managers’ understanding of marketing phenomena,” Decision Support Syst., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 79–92, Nov. 2007.
[16] T. Rienzo and B. Han, “Does ERP hands-on experience help students
learning business process concepts?,” Decision Sci. J. Innov. Educ.,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 177–207, 2011.
[17] T. Teo, “Modelling technology acceptance in education: A study of preservice teachers,” Comput. Educ., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 302–312, 2009.
[18] A. Padillamelendez, A. Garridomoreno, and A. Delaguilaobra, “Factors affecting e-collaboration technology use among management students,” Comput. Educ., vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 609–623, 2008.
[19] A. Frank and A. Asuncion, “UCI machine learning repository,” 2010
[Online]. Available: http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml
[20] T. Chenoweth, K. Dowling, and R. S. Louis, “Convincing DSS users
that complex models are worth the effort,” Decision Support Syst., vol.
37, no. 1, pp. 71–82, Apr. 2004.
[21] I. B. Myers, M. H. McCaulley, N. L. Quenk, and A. L. Hammer, MBTI
Manual. A Guide to the Development and Use of Myers-Briggs Type
Indicator, 3rd ed. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychol. Press, 2003.
[22] C. M. Ringle, S. Wende, and S. Will, “SmartPLS 2.0 (M3) Beta,” Hamburg, Germany, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://www.smartpls.de

REFERENCES
[1] R. Fang and S. Tuladha, “Teaching data warehousing and data mining
in a graduate program of information technology,” J. Comput. Sci.
Coll., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 137–144, 2006.
[2] N. V. Chawla, “Teaching data mining by coalescing theory and applications,” in Proc. 35th Annu. Conf. Frontiers Educ., Indianapolis, IN,
2005, p. S1J-7.
[3] D. R. Musicant, “A data mining course for computer science: Primary
sources and implementations,” SIGCSE Bull., vol. 38, no. 1, pp.
538–542, Mar. 2006.
[4] J. Han, M. Kamber, and P. Horn, Data Mining: Concept and Techniques, 3rd ed. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2011.
[5] P.-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, and V. Kumar, Introduction to Data Mining,
1st ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[6] I. Mierswa, M. Wurst, R. Klinkenberg, M. Scholz, and T. Euler,
“YALE: Rapid prototyping for complex data mining tasks,” in Proc.
12th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Mining, 2006, pp.
935–940.
[7] M. Vukićević, M. Jovanović, B. Delibašić, and M. Suknović,
“WhiBo—RapidMiner plug-in for component based data mining
algorithm design,” in Proc. 1st RapidMiner Community Meeting
Conf., Dortmund, Germany, 2010, pp. 33–38.
[8] B. Delibašić, M. Jovanović, M. Vukićević, M. Suknović, and Z.
Obradović, “Component-based decision trees for classification,”
Intell. Data Anal., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 671–693, Aug. 2011.
[9] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user
acceptance of information technology,” MIS Quart., vol. 13, no. 3, pp.
319–340, Sept. 1989.
[10] M. Gong, Y. Xu, and Y. Yu, “An enhanced technology acceptance
model for web-based learning,” J. Inf. Syst. Educ., vol. 15, no. 4, pp.
365–374, 2004.
[11] H. Cramer, V. Evers, S. Ramlal, M. Someren, L. Rutledge, N. Stash,
L. Aroyo, and B. Wilienga, “The effects of transparency on trust in and
acceptance of a content-based art recommender,” User Model UserAdapted Interact., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 455–496, May 2007.
[12] J. Huysmans, K. Dejaeger, C. Mues, J. Vanthienen, and B. Baesens,
“An empirical evaluation of the comprehensibility of decision table,
tree and rule based predictive models,” Decision Support Syst., vol.
51, no. 1, pp. 141–154, Apr. 2011.
[13] M. Ware, “Interactive machine learning: Letting users build classifiers,” Int. J. Human–Comput. Studies, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 281–292, Sep.
2001.
[14] S. Stumpf, V. Rajaram, L. Li, W. K. Wong, M. Burnett, T. Dietterich,
E. Sullivan, E. Herlocker, and J. Herlocker, “Interacting meaningfully with machine learning systems: Three experiments,” Int. J.
Human–Comput. Studies, vol. 67, no. 8, pp. 639–662, Aug. 2009.

Boris Delibašić (M’12) received the Ph.D. degree in business decision making
from the University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, in 2007.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the Faculty of Organizational Sciences, School of Business Administration, University of Belgrade. He teaches
business intelligence and business decision making. Since 2011 he has been
Assistant to the Board of the European Working Group on decision support
systems. His research interests are in data mining algorithm design, data warehousing, and decision support systems.
Dr. Delibašić received a post-doctoral Fulbright scholarship at the Center for
Data Analytics and Biomedical Informatics, Temple University, Philadelphia,
PA, in 2011.

Milan Vukićević received the M.Sc. degree in business decision making from
the University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, in 2009.
He is a Teaching Assistant with the Faculty of Organizational Sciences,
School of Business Administration, University of Belgrade, where he teaches
business intelligence and business decision making. He has been active since
2009 in the Rapid Miner open-source data mining platform community. His
research interests are in data mining algorithm design, data warehousing, and
software engineering.

Miloš Jovanović received the M.Sc. degree in business decision making from
the University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, in 2010.
He is a Teaching Assistant with the Faculty of Organizational Sciences,
School of Business Administration, University of Belgrade, where he teaches
business intelligence and business decision making. He has been active since
2009 in the Rapid Miner open-source data mining platform community. His
research interests are in data mining algorithm design, data warehousing, and
software engineering.

Milija Suknović received the Ph.D. degree in business decision making from
the University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, in 2003.
He is a Full Professor with the Faculty of Organizational Sciences, School
of Business Administration, University of Belgrade, where he teaches business
intelligence and business decision making. Currently, he is Vice-Dean for Education with the Faculty of Organizational Sciences. He is part of the Editorial
Board of the Yugoslav Journal of Operations Research. His research interests
are in data warehousing, group decision support systems, and group decision
making and negotiations.

