See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281290040

Bias in observational study designs: Cross sectional studies
Article in BMJ (online) · March 2015
DOI: 10.1136/bmj.h1286

CITATIONS

READS

11

2,696

1 author:
Philip Sedgwick
St George's, University of London
400 PUBLICATIONS 4,231 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

BMJ Statistics Endgames View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Philip Sedgwick on 03 January 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

BMJ 2015;350:h1286 doi: 10.1136/bmj.h1286 (Published 6 March 2015)

Page 1 of 2

Endgames

ENDGAMES
STATISTICAL QUESTION

Bias in observational study designs: cross sectional
studies
Philip Sedgwick reader in medical statistics and medical education
Institute for Medical and Biomedical Education, St George’s, University of London, London, UK

Researchers investigated the association between body mass
index (BMI) and both sexual behaviour and adverse sexual
health outcomes, as well as their importance in obese people.
A telephone survey with a cross sectional study design was
used. Participants were French speaking men and women aged
18-69 years who lived in France. The telephone survey was a
population based one that involved a random sample of
households selected from the national telephone directory. In
total, 12 364 people were contacted by telephone between
September 2005 and March 2006. Of those initially selected,
10 170 (82.3%) agreed to complete the questionnaire.1

An association between BMI and both sexual behaviour and
adverse sexual health outcomes was reported. In particular,
obese women were less likely to access contraceptive healthcare
services and were more likely to have an unplanned pregnancy.
It was concluded that the prevention of unintended pregnancies
among obese women is a major reproductive health challenge.
Healthcare professionals need to be aware of sensitivities related
to weight and gender in the provision of sexual health services.
Which of the following statements, if any, are true?
a) The use of a population based study minimised selection
bias
b) The sample would have been prone to non-response bias
c) The sample was prone to volunteer bias
d) The results of the study were prone to ascertainment bias

Answers

Statements a, b, c, and d are all true.

The researchers performed a cross sectional study, which is
observational in design. Cross sectional studies have been
described in a previous question.2 In an observational study the
investigators do not intervene in any way but record the health,
behaviour, attitudes, or lifestyle choices of the study participants.
As the name suggests, the aim of a cross sectional study is to
obtain a representative sample by taking a cross section of the
population. All the measurements for a study participant are
obtained at a single point in time, although recruitment may

take place across a period of time. Cross sectional studies are
generally quick, easy, and cheap to perform, and they often
involve a questionnaire survey.

In the study above, the participants were French speaking men
and women aged 18-69 years who lived in France. A telephone
survey was conducted, involving a random sample of households
selected from the telephone directory. Each participant was
interviewed once, with recruitment taking place between
September 2005 and March 2006. As for any study, the method
of sampling and availability of potential participants will have
affected the extent of selection bias. Selection bias is a general
term used to describe a group of biases and effects that result
in a sample that is systematically different from the population
it is intended to represent. The study above was population
based—that is, the sample was obtained from a defined
population. A sample resulting from a population based study
is therefore likely to be representative of the population, thereby
minimising selection bias (a is true). The use of random
sampling across the population meant that selection bias was
minimised further. This is in contrast to a sample from, for
example, a hospital clinic using convenience sampling3—such
a sample would probably be systematically different from the
population with respect to its demographics and health
outcomes. If selection bias exists it results in a lack of external
validity—that is, the extent to which the study results can be
generalised to the population that the sample is meant to
represent.
In the study above, participants were contacted using random
sampling of households from the national telephone directory.
Therefore, ownership of a phone and listing in the directory
would have influenced inclusion in the study. Furthermore,
people would have been included in the study only if they were
at home to answer the telephone call if randomly selected. The
extent to which these factors would have influenced selection
bias is difficult to quantify; limited information would have
been available for those people who did not own a telephone or
for those who were not at home when the researchers called.

p.sedgwick@sgul.ac.uk
For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

BMJ 2015;350:h1286 doi: 10.1136/bmj.h1286 (Published 6 March 2015)

Page 2 of 2

ENDGAMES

In total, 12 364 people were contacted by telephone, of whom
10 170 (82.3%) agreed to complete the questionnaire. Therefore,
the resulting sample would have been prone to non-response
bias (b is true). Non-response bias would have occurred if those
people who did not accept the invitation to be part of the study
were different from those who did. However, any differences
in characteristics (including demographics, BMI, and sexual
behaviour plus adverse sexual health outcomes) would have
been difficult to quantify because limited information, if any,
would be available for those who were selected but refused to
be part of the study. Non-response bias is a particular problem
for questionnaire surveys because usually not all people who
are approached will agree to take part. Non-response bias should
not be confused with volunteer bias or response bias, which are
described below.

The sample in the study above was prone to volunteer bias (c
is true)—a systematic difference between those people who
volunteered to be part of the survey and the population. The
volunteers would be expected to differ from the population in
their sociodemography, behaviour, attitudes, and health. It has
been reported that, in general, those who participate in studies
are more educated, come from a higher social class, and are
more sociable than those who do not participate. Non-response
bias and volunteer bias are often confused. Non-response bias
focuses on the potential differences between the non-responders
and responders originally selected for the sample, whereas
volunteer bias considers the potential differences between those
who volunteer and the population. Both will result in selection
bias.
The collection of data in the above study was prone to
ascertainment bias (d is true). Such bias would have occurred
if the information recorded for the respondents regarding their
BMI, sexual behaviour, or adverse sexual health outcomes was

For personal use only: See rights and reprints http://www.bmj.com/permissions
View publication stats

systematically different from their actual BMI or experiences.
Such bias in data collection can be unconscious or otherwise,
and can originate from the investigators or participants. When
ascertainment bias occurs on behalf of the participants, it is
referred to as response bias. It is a particular problem in
questionnaire surveys that investigate socially unacceptable or
potentially embarrassing behaviours. For example, participants
may have under-reported their weight or sexual behaviour
because of embarrassment. If information bias occurs on behalf
of researchers or interviewers it is referred to as assessment
bias, sometimes known as observer bias. In the above study
assessment bias might have occurred despite the telephone
interviewers having been trained. The recording of data could
have been influenced by the attitudes or past experiences of the
interviewers, particularly if the participants provided responses
that were subjective and difficult to qualify or quantify.
Cross sectional studies are sometimes repeated to assess trends
over time. However, if different participants are included at
each time point then caution will be needed when interpreting
the results. It may be difficult to assess whether changes in
behaviour or attitudes reflect a trend or simply differences
between different groups of participants sampled from the
population.
Competing interests: None declared.
1
2
3

Bajos N, Wellings K, Laborde C, et al; for the CSF Group. Sexuality and obesity, a gender
perspective: results from French national random probability survey of sexual behaviours.
BMJ 2010;340:c2573.
Sedgwick P. Cross sectional studies: advantages and disadvantages. BMJ
2014;348:g2276.
Sedgwick P. Convenience sampling. BMJ 2013;347:f6304.

Cite this as: BMJ 2015;350:h1286
© BMJ Publishing Group Ltd 2015

Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe

