Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Ecological Modelling
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ecolmodel

Opening the black box—Development, testing and documentation of a
mechanistically rich agent-based model
Chris J. Topping a,b,∗ , Toke T. Høye a,b , Carsten Riis Olesen a
a
b

Department of Wildlife Ecology and Biodiversity, National Environmental Research Institute, Aarhus University, Grenåvej 14, DK-8410 Rønde, Denmark
Centre for Integrated Population Ecology, Roskilde University, PO Box 260, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 6 April 2009
Received in revised form
18 September 2009
Accepted 24 September 2009
Available online 30 October 2009
Keywords:
European brown hare
Lepus europaeus
Modelling protocol
Pattern-oriented modelling
Simulation model
ODdox
In silico approaches

a b s t r a c t
Although increasingly widely used in biology, complex adaptive simulation models such as agent-based
models have been criticised for being difﬁcult to communicate and test. This study demonstrates the
application of pattern-oriented model testing, and a novel documentation procedure to present a detailed
agent-based model of the European brown hare, a species in widespread decline in Europe.
The model was built based on available literature data, using multiple ﬁeld data patterns from an
island hare population study to guide model development. A general and widely applicable approach
to the pattern-oriented protocol for testing and developing ecological models of this kind was deﬁned
together with the development of the ODdox documentation protocol, a combination of the current ODD
protocol for describing agent-based models and source-code documentation. The result is a detailed
and yet accessible description of the processes included in the model. Application of the model to a
comprehensive historical data set supported the hypothesis that interference competition is the primary
population regulating factor in the absence of mammal predators in the brown hare, and that the effect
works through reduced fecundity.
With a clearly deﬁned testing protocol and documentation, this in silico modelling approach has clear
advantages for applications requiring integration of many factors, especially when spatio-temporal variability is important. Providing multi-facetted output which can be compared to real-world data allows
the formulation and testing of varied hypotheses in ways not tractable to experimentation. In the case
of the brown hare the results provide a new insight into population regulation and the causes of the
declines.
© 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Background
Agent-based models (ABMs) are gaining popularity in most scientiﬁc ﬁelds due to their ability to describe complex systems from
ﬁrst principles. Yet, they are also criticised for being ‘black boxes’
and impossible to fully understand. This is mainly due to the difﬁculty of testing, documenting and communicating the wealth
of mechanisms built into such models. However, testing these
complex adaptive models has been aided by recent advances in
pattern-oriented modelling (POM Grimm et al., 2005b), which is
becoming a widely used framework (Grimm et al., 1996; Wiegand
et al., 2003, 2004; Grimm and Railsback, 2005a). POM evaluates
model behaviour and reduces parameter uncertainty by comparing
model responses to real-world data at multiple hierarchical levels.

∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Wildlife Ecology and Biodiversity,
National Environmental Research Institute, Aarhus University, Grenåvej 14, DK8410, Rønde, Denmark. Tel.: +45 89201700.
E-mail address: cjt@dmu.dk (C.J. Topping).
0304-3800/$ – see front matter © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2009.09.014

The greater the number of real world patterns the model can predict
simultaneously the greater the conﬁdence in the model.
There have also been advances in the documentation of ABMs.
The Overview, Design and Detail protocol (ODD) (Grimm et al.,
2006) attempts to divide the model description into overview and
detailed sections. The latter section should provide enough information for reconstruction of the model by a third party. However,
for large simulation models the ODD approach is impractical for
documentation to the level that would allow replication of the
model due simply to the volume of information required. On the
other hand, simulation models are based on programming code,
which provides the complete description of the model, but in a
form only accessible to the experienced programmer. Hence, ideally ODD and code should be combined to form a comprehensive
but approachable documentation.
Here, we implement a rigorous application of POM and combine the ODD protocol for documentation with a software industry
standard tool for documenting object-oriented computer program
code (van Heesch, 1997) to provide a highly structured and easily accessible model documentation. We exemplify this procedure

246

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

by presenting the testing, documentation and communication of
a mechanistically rich agent-based model (sensu DeAngelis and
Mooij, 2003) of the European brown hare (Lepus europaeus) built
upon energetic and behavioural processes. We then apply the
model as a theoretical framework to the investigation of population
regulating mechanisms in brown hare populations.
The decline in population of the brown hare since the 1960s
throughout Europe is well documented (Strandgaard and Asferg,
1980; Tapper and Parsons, 1984; Hutchings and Harris, 1996;
Marboutin et al., 2003). Although generally still widespread, local
populations are considered endangered (Vaughan et al., 2003) and
in Switzerland it is included in the national red list (Pﬁster et al.,
2002). There is also considerable interest in reversing these population trends due to the economics of hunting. Numerous factors have
been implicated in the declines including changes in landscape
structure, management, climate, predation, and disease, altering
food supply, reproduction and/or survival (Smith et al., 2005). Habitat changes caused by agricultural intensiﬁcation seem to play a
major role although it has been difﬁcult to relate this back to demographic changes in hare populations (Smith et al., 2005). This is
likely to be due to interactions among multiple causal drivers and
because there is considerable spatial and temporal variability in
ﬁeld estimates of demographic variables. For example, the number
of leverets per female produced per year varies between 1.4 and
15.0 (Abilgård et al., 1972; Marboutin et al., 2003), and age structure and survival rates appear to show similar variation between
populations (Smith et al., 2005).
Integrating the range of factors that are implicated in brown hare
declines requires a ﬂexible framework that includes physiological
processes at the individual level, hare behaviour and the dynamics
of a rapidly changing landscape including agricultural management. This system is therefore an ideal candidate for a complex
ABM approach.
This paper presents methods used to generate a well tested and
documented brown hare model as a basis for hypothesis generation
and testing. The model was tested using a simple POM protocol and
sensitivity analysis resulting in the evaluation of a range of potential
population control mechanisms. The documentation is presented
using a protocol we refer to as ODdox, which together with the POM
protocol aims to improve the transparency of detailed agent-based
models, previously criticized for being black boxes.
2. Methods
The modelling approach used here implements what is termed
‘the modelling cycle’ for a complex system of interacting agents
(Grimm and Railsback, 2005a). The modelling cycle is an iterative
process whereby model formulations are tested against carefully
selected performance criteria (see below) in order to develop a
model to answer a question, itself potentially changing as part of
the cycle. To provide a structure to this process we present the
structure of the modelling cycle in stages:
A.
B.
C.
D.

Deﬁnition of the question.
Model construction.
Identiﬁcation of performance criteria.
Iterative testing and reformulation of the model, altering ‘A, B &
C’ as necessary (POM approach).
E. Sensitivity analysis of the resulting ﬁnal model.
F. Model documentation.
G. Application of the model to the question deﬁned in ‘A’.
In order to emphasise the importance of documentation we
have added step ‘F’ to the modelling cycle. The brown hare species
model presented here was built as part of the ALMaSS model frame-

work (Topping et al., 2003b) and attempts to integrate a wide
range of factors related to spatio-temporal patterns of habitat and
food availability and interactions between these, agriculture, and
the brown hare’s biology. ALMaSS is a highly detailed ABM system designed to simulate impacts of human management on key
species of Danish wildlife. It utilizes a dynamic landscape providing vegetation growth and management on daily time-steps
with a resolution of 1 m2 and a typical extent of 10 km × 10 km.
Management of crops is handled using crop management plans
and handled at the farm scale, affecting crop growth and providing spatio-temporally located managements, e.g. harvest. Speciﬁc
details of ALMaSS affecting the hare model are described under
model testing below together with a model overview, however full
documentation of the hare model is provided in Appendix I.
2.1. Deﬁnition of the model question
The model was designed to evaluate the importance of population control mechanisms on the hare population of island of Illumø,
Denmark. Illumø was chosen since it provided a long-term, data
rich study of a brown hare population in the absence of confounding
factors such as dispersal and mammalian predators. This required
the simulation of Illumø under 1960s conditions at a spatial and
temporal scale commensurate with the details necessary to include
population control mechanisms. It also required an approach that
allowed easy experimentation with multiple factors. The ultimate
model aim was to create predictions which could be used to test
and reﬁne the models applicability to other hare populations.
2.2. Model construction
To answer the model question it was necessary to model all
life-stages of the brown hare, which we identiﬁed as male, female,
juvenile (36–265 days), mobile young (12–35 days), and infant
(1–11 days). The deﬁnition of the three juvenile stages was related
to total dependency on the mother, partial dependency and independency as the hare ages. Knowledge about hares and their
decision processes is far from complete; hence a basic mechanistic
approach was selected based on fundamental principles of energetics. Energy is therefore the ‘currency’ of the brown hare model
and the primary basis upon which hare decisions are implemented.
This approach has been used previously with success in integrative
simulation models of this kind (Stillman et al., 2001; Topping and
Odderskaer, 2004), and the energetic approach has also been used
to model behaviour in individual hares to obtain realistic behaviour
(Rizzotto and Focardi, 1997). The details of the hare energetics used
to construct the model are presented in Appendix II.
2.3. Identiﬁcation of performance criteria
2.3.1. Initial debugging and plausibility tests
The structural integrity of the initial model as well and the general responses were evaluated. This involved testing of individual
code segments and processes to ensure that responses were as
intended. For example in the case where model hares were given
excess food to ensure that no starvation occurs, body weights are
at maximum. Visual debugging (sensu Grimm, 2002) and standard
plausibility tests were also used to evaluate hare spatial behaviour
and the set of rules used to construct the model.
2.3.2. Illumø Island population patterns
The hare study carried out on Illumø island off the island of
Fynen, Denmark 1957–1970 (Abilgård et al., 1972) provided a
unique opportunity to test various aspects of model performance.
The island is approximately 1 km2 in area and has a very elongated form (Fig. 1A). The original study documents many aspects of

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

247

Table 1
Crop area proportions for Illumø island simulations in ALMaSS.
Crop

Proportion

Spring barley
Grass
Root crops (fodder beet)
Oats
Potatoes
Winter wheat
Winter rye
Pulses

0.34
0.30
0.14
0.06
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.01

two years occurred consecutively. This 56-year set was appended
to a copy of years 1–4 to give a total of 60 weather years used for
all simulations. In addition to 1960s crops and weather, pesticides
were removed from the management plans and all crops designated as being ‘patchy’. This patchy designation simulated the open
structure of the crop with wide gaps between rows characteristic
of crops of that time and clearly visible in the photographs from the
time (see Abilgård et al., 1972).
2.3.2.1. Realised hare weights with age and variance. The Illumø
study provided a data set of 1275 age-indexed hare weights over a
period of 14-years to compare to model outputs. Since hare weights
is an emergent property resulting from the individuals life-time
physiological status, and therefore energetic balance, the mean
weights with age should provide a sensitive measure of model realism. Variance around model weights of the same scale as that found
in the Illumø study was considered to be a secondary target which
would indicate that model hares and real world hares varied in
weights within the same range in a similar manner (Patterns 1 & 7,
Tables 2 and 3).

Fig. 1. Map data and ﬁeld patterns used in simulations. (A) The digital map of Illumø
Island used as the basis for the major part of simulations. This island was the location
of an extensive ﬁeld study on brown hares between 1957 and 1970 (Abilgård et al.,
1972), resulting in a number of well supported ﬁeld data patterns such as changes
in population number (B). (C) Landscape heterogeneity analyses used four 8 × 8 km
landscapes (L1–L4) to test the effect of increasing heterogeneity on the model hare
population responses. Colours indicate ﬁelds managed identically. The areas of all
ﬁelds and other habitats, management and vegetation growth were identical in all
four landscapes, only the degree of fragmentation of the patches was been altered
using a geometrical fragmentation process.

the hare population over this period with extensive mark-releaserecapture experiments. Thus it provides many potential patterns
for comparisons with model outputs. Both ﬁrst order patterns
(means) and second order patterns (variances) were considered as
potentially useful ways of screening models.
The simulation of the hare population of Illumø was based on a
digitised map from 1957 and current aerial photographs. Abilgård
et al. (1972) give details of the type and proportion of crops grown
during the study period, and these were used together with national
agricultural statistics from Denmark for that period to construct a
crop rotation for ALMaSS that resulted in a crop by area coverage
matching the Illumø situation (Table 1). Daily weather data was
not available for Illumø, but a complete time series of air temperature, wind and precipitation was obtained for the years 1957–1970
from the Tranbjerg weather station (55◦ 50 N 10◦ 37 E), 80 km from
Illumø (Cappelen et al., 2008). To prevent artiﬁcial 14-year cycles,
a set of 60 representative weather years was constructed by randomly ordering a set of four copies of the 14-year series such that no

2.3.2.2. Population size. Mean and variance around population size
over the study period was considered to be a very reliable estimate
(Patterns 2 & 8, Tables 2 and 3). The Illumø population size ﬂuctuated in what seems like a stable limit cycle (Fig. 1B), hence some
form of oscillation was desirable in the model generated population dynamic trends. Combined with pattern 7, these ﬂuctuations
were used to screen model conﬁgurations, but were not used in
subsequent parameter ﬁtting due to the lack of precision.
2.3.2.3. Adult and juvenile survival rates. Abilgård et al. (1972) measured annual survival rates of 0.438 and 0.552 for juveniles and
adult females, respectively. These data were based on 1275 hares
using capture, mark and recapture methods with up to 10 recaptures per individual. Mean survival rates were used with their
variances (Patterns 3, 4, 9, 10, Tables 2 and 3).
2.3.2.4. Population age structure. The relative proportion of juvenile and adults was well documented in the original study. The
measure used here was the proportion of young females (i.e.
females < 1 year old/total females) (Patterns 5 & 11, Tables 2 and 3).
2.3.2.5. Sex ratio. The sex ratio on Illumø was rather consistently
biased towards males, even though the inﬂux of new animals
recorded at the time was slightly biased in the opposite direction.
In only 3 years out of 14 were the as many males as females, and
in one of these years this was achieved by experimental manipulation. The mean annual proportion of females in adults over 1
year old prior to experimental manipulation was 0.429 (n = 8, variance = 0.004). This ﬁgure and its variance were adopted as a target
pattern (Pattern 6 & 12, Tables 2 and 3).

248

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

Table 2
Slopes of ﬁtted regressions using ﬁrst order response patterns as the dependent variable. Slopes of less than 0.1 or with p > 0.05 are not shown. Bold indicates p < 0.001.
Parameters are described in Table 4.
Parameter

Female hare
weights (P1)

1 ExtEff
–
2 YLoss
–
3 JLoss
0.14
4 ALoss
0.38
5 DDconst
–
6 BreedWt
–
7 RepEnd
–
8 Rep Start
–
9 SwitchJA
–
10 ADispThr
–
11 FoetalGrProp −0.56
12 GrAttain
0.11
13 RainF
–
14 JStarve
–

Female density
(P2)
3.11
−0.49
−1.19
−2.84
−1.15
−0.23
–
0.87
−0.33
−0.14
4.83
−0.53
−0.17
–

Female adult
surviv (P3)

Juv surviv (P4)
−0.16
0.12
−0.40
−3.86
–
0.24
–
0.98
−0.62
–
−2.57
–
–
–

–
–
–
−6.68
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

2.3.3. General hare patterns
2.3.3.1. Breeding patterns. The number of litters is an emergent
property because it is based upon the physiological condition of
the model hares limiting breeding to periods when fat reserves
are sufﬁcient. The number of litters (Pattern 14, Table 2) can be
compared to the range of 2.3–5.2 found by Pielowski (1975, 1976),
Raczynski (1964), Hansen (1992) and Marboutin et al. (2003). The
mean number of leverets per litter is also variable (range 2.2–2.8)
from the same studies (Pattern 13, Table 2). In both these cases,
precise values are not possible to obtain, however likely values are
at the lower end of these ranges since on Illumø the mean number
of juveniles per adult was 3 (range 1.4–5.0) (Abilgård et al., 1972).
Targets selected were therefore a mean litter size of 2.2–2.5 and an
annual number of litters 2.3–3.0.

2.3.3.2. Positive effect of increasing habitat heterogeneity. A review
of hare research found that increased habitat heterogeneity had
a positive impact on overall hare numbers (Smith et al., 2005).
This pattern was tested by isolating heterogeneity as a factor. This
was achieved by creating a set of four artiﬁcial landscapes based
on an actual 1 × 1 km area and running the simulations using the
Illumø simulation settings. All four landscapes were 8 × 8 km, the
ﬁrst being a scaled up version of 1 km2 area, the second formed of
four 4 × 4 km areas scaled in the same way, the third made from
16 2 × 2 km scaled areas, and the last of 64 copies of the original 1 km2 (Fig. 1C). This method of manipulating the landscapes
ensured that the only factor that varied was the location of individual units of particular habitat patches, which become more and
more fragmented as the grain of the landscape was increased. In this

Juv::ads (P5)
0.10
–
0.13
4.91
–
−0.12
–
−0.50
0.29
–
2.29
–
–
–

Sex ratio (P6)
–
–
0.23
0.59
–
0.12
–
0.51
−0.36
–
−0.78
0.11
–
–

Litter no. (P13)

Litter size (P14)

0.38
–
0.28
−2.16
–
–
–
−0.85
−0.22
−0.10
3.06
0.64
–
–

0.35
0.12
0.33
0.98
–
0.25
–
–
–
−0.75
28.78
0.32
–
–

experimental manipulation, management carried out in one ﬁeld
in the homogenous landscape is carried out simultaneously in four
ﬁelds of one quarter the size in the next landscape, and likewise 16
and 64 ﬁelds in the following landscapes. Means of 10 replicates
of 60 year runs were used to assess model population responses to
increasing habitat heterogeneity (Pattern 15).

2.4. Iterative testing and reformulation of the model
Iterative testing was carried out in two stages: (i) Initially the
aim was to simulate the Illumø population by matching patterns
1–8 as closely as possible; (ii) thereafter checking if the other patterns were adequately matched and if not continuing the iterative
cycle by modifying the model and testing the patterns again.
The range of parameter space was enormous and hence a
Monte Carlo approach was not possible, rather the parameters were
adjusted manually to obtain responses; using the responses as a
guide, further manipulations were made to ﬁnd the optimal ﬁt. To
speed up initial identiﬁcation of the area of optimal ﬁt an ad hoc
iterative sub-procedure was adopted for ‘i’ which was to minimise
a weighted least squares estimate of the difference between a mean
of replicated scenario runs with a speciﬁc model conﬁguration and
parameter-set values. Weights used were 4 to pattern 3 (density)
which was considered to be the most secure real-world data, 0.1
to patterns 2 and 4, which were considered to be of lower strength
patterns since they are second order descriptors and highly variable, and 1.0 to all other patterns. The purpose of the weighting
was to quickly direct the parameter selection to the optimal area,
in particular to avoid too great a reliance on variable and numer-

Table 3
Slopes of ﬁtted regressions using second order response patterns (variances) as the dependent variable. Slopes of less than 0.1 or with p > 0.05 are not shown. Bold indicates
p < 0.001.
Parameter
1 ExtEff
2 YLoss
3 JLoss
4 ALoss
5 DDconst
6 BreedWt
7 RepEnd
8 Rep Start
9 SwitchJA
10 ADispThr
11 FoetalGrProp
12 GrAttain
13 RainF
14 JStarve

Var female hare
weights (P7)
−0.77
–
−0.83
−1.92
0.16
−0.19
–
–
–
–
2.89
−0.14
–
−0.77

Var female
density (P8)
−0.83
–
2.12
10.63
−2.64
0.57
–
−1.32
–
0.16
−10.66
−0.89
–
−0.83

Var female adult
surviv (P9)
−2.77
–
2.76
7.15
1.14
0.96
−0.14
−4.01
0.99
–
−14.10
0.88
0.31
−2.77

Var juv surviv (P10)
−1.24
0.63
0.77
−2.18
0.33
0.57
–
–
0.38
–
−6.07
0.32
0.17
−1.24

Var juv::ads (P11)
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

Var sex ratio (P12)
−1.13
–
1.06
6.85
0.43
0.26
–
−1.11
0.48
–
−3.14
0.41
0.14
−1.13

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

249

Table 4
Parameters used in the sensitivity analysis. See OODox documentation in Appendix III for detailed information.
Parameter

Short description

1 ExtEff
2 YLoss
3 JLoss
4 ALoss
5 DDconst
6 BreedWt
7 RepEnd
8 Rep Start
9 SwitchJA
10 ADispThr
11 FoetalGrProp
12 GrAttain
13 RainF
14 JStarve

The rate of energy intake, assuming no reduction due to impedance or palatability.
The daily rate of loss of young and infant stages not accounted for by other factors (primarily predation).
The daily rate of loss of juveniles not accounted for by other factors (primarily predation).
The daily rate of loss of adults not accounted for by other factors (predation, disease).
A negative exponent used to decrease the proportion of time available for feeding with increase local density.
A minimum weight below which a female hare cannot breed.
The last day of the reproductive season after which oestrous is not possible.
The date of onset of oestrous at the start of a new season.
The length of the period between becoming adult and switching to zero probability of starvation with negative energy deﬁcit.
The threshold energy depot level at which the adult will attempt to disperse.
The proportion of energy surplus used for production of foetal mass.
The proportion of age-indexed maximum possible growth which must be achieved to avoid death due to under-development.
The scaling factor applied to the increase in RMR with rainfall.
A probability of starving to death if in negative energy deﬁcit.

ically large second order patterns. The weights have little bearing
on the ﬁnal parameter values selected assuming that the ﬁnal ﬁt is
good but do affect the speed of identiﬁcation of these values. Once
a close enough ﬁt was achieved, loosely deﬁned as all responding patterns being within 10% of their targets, a structured set of
scenarios was created by varying all parameters under testing by
ﬁxed proportions either side of the current chosen value. If parameters were not already in the optimum range this was identiﬁed
by a lower least squares value for a non-centre parameter value.
In this case the parameter value was altered and the structured set
of scenarios re-run. The scenarios were replicated a minimum of
10 times. Initial criteria for a ﬁt were that all ﬁrst order patterns
should be within ±5% of the Illumø population targets, and that
within this the least squares statistic should be minimised. Model
conﬁgurations that did not achieve this were abandoned; those that
did were tested against patterns 9–12. The best model conﬁguration and parameter-set values found were ﬁxed and the sensitivity
analysis was started.
Since we used sex ratio and female density as target patterns,
male patterns were superﬂuous and were not used in the analysis,
although males were modelled in as great detail as females.
Model versions used for testing were based on combinations
of conﬁguration options (see Appendix III), and were designed to
evaluate the potential for different population controlling factors
to produce the patterns observed on Illumø. Four primary mechanisms were tested:

C1—Disease: implemented as a delayed density-dependent probability of a female being unable to produce young. The density effect
was related to the mean density experienced during the previous
year.
C2—Density-dependent mortality: implemented as an exponentially increasing likelihood of predation of an individual with
increasing experienced density. This effect was applied to leveret,
young and juvenile stages only since predators capable of killing
adults were not present on Illumø.
C3—Stochastic variation on mortality and food quality: implemented as an annual modiﬁer applied independently to food
quality (±max 10%) and all mortality probabilities (±10%).
Density-dependent mortality was also utilised above a threshold
value of 80 hares km−2 to prevent population explosions, as C2.
C4 – Interference competition – implemented as an exponentially
increasing proportion of time spent ‘communicating’ with nearby
hares as local hare density increased. Local density was deﬁned as
being within a ﬁxed radius. Time spent in this way was unavailable
for foraging and therefore resulted in a lowered energy intake and
ultimately affected the physiological condition of the hares.

Within each of these basic model conﬁgurations a range of options
were also tested, e.g. with and without threshold density dependence.
2.5. Sensitivity analysis of the resulting ﬁnal model
The parameter values achieving the best ﬁt from 3D above were
used as a pivot point, and the parameters identiﬁed as important in
the iterative development process (Table 4) were adjusted independently to ±5, 10, 20 and 40% of their pivot point values. A minimum
of 40 replicates were obtained for each scenario. The deviation from
target patterns 1–14 was used as the dependent variable and linear
regressions were ﬁtted to each target/parameter combination.
All statistical analyses were performed using SAS ver 9.13
(SAS, 2002), simulation lengths were 60 years with the ﬁrst
20 years ignored to allow model stabilization. Due to the high
annual variability approximately 4.5% of simulation runs resulted in
population extinction. Although these runs contained useful information, the disproportionate impact on the ﬁt to patterns made us
exclude them from the analyses.
2.6. Model documentation (ODdox)
Model documentation was created by combining a modiﬁed
version of the ODD protocol with documented code using doxygen
(van Heesch, 1997) to create what we term ODdox documentation. The ODD (Overview, Design, Detail) protocol divides the
model documentation into deﬁned sections covering aspects of
model structure and functioning, and ﬁnally model details. The
new ODdox protocol (Overview, Design, doxygen) broadly follows
ODD protocol, but is completed and augmented by extracting comments from the source code. The details of the model are therefore
described via descriptions of classes, methods, and variables using
hyperlinks to the relevant sections in the source code. In contrast
to the ODD, this means that by far the major part of the documentation is placed outside the traditional ODD sections, but linked to
them via hyperlinks. The ODdox was speciﬁcally designed to facilitate documentation of large object-oriented models with many
interacting components, and to provide a ﬂexible way of building
documentation as the software is developed. It is therefore structured following logical divisions of the model entities, primarily
base class types. At each subdivision there is a class or set of linked
classes in focus, and six of the seven ODD sections are written for
these classes. The “Submodels” section of ODD becomes superﬂuous since any links to sub-models are covered by class descriptions
for the classes in focus, and submodels per se should not exist.
However, there may be important connections between the focus
classes and other ODdox sections (e.g. other species, environment).

250

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

Fig. 2. Pattern-oriented testing using comparisons of ﬁeld data and model output. Conﬁguration C1—delayed density dependence such as disease; C2—direct densitydependent mortality; C3—stochastic processes with a high density-dependent mortality threshold; C4—interference competition leading to reduced time available for
foraging. The ﬁt of all four conﬁgurations was compared to ﬁeld data from Illumø with the aim of reducing all deviances using a single set of parameters for each conﬁguration.
(A) Best ﬁt to ﬁrst order target patterns (means) for C1–C4, (B), the same parameter sets’ ﬁt to second order target patterns (variances). Fit statistic is a weighted mean deviance
of all patterns. (C) Shows the use of the ﬁt statistic to ﬁne tune the parameter values to minimise all deviances between model output and ﬁeld patterns for a single parameter
(food extraction efﬁciency, ExtEff). Response variables with very weak or no response have been removed for clarity. (D) After parameter ﬁtting was completed the optimal
set of parameter values obtained was used to predict female hare weights providing a close ﬁt to the Illumø data.

A new section, “Interconnections”, is used to describe these and
provide html links to them. This approach permits the documentation of large models to be built as an expandable library, and rather
than rewriting documentation for additions only requires judicious
updating of the interconnection section, doxygen performs the rest
of the tasks based on software comments in the new code. Our
aim in developing ODdox was therefore to provide an easier, more
complete, and more ﬂexible method of documenting large models
together with a more user friendly interface, beneﬁtting developers
and readers alike.
The resulting html documentation presented here provides an
overview of the brown hare model as well as a fully hyperlinked
class hierarchy showing the relationships between classes, their
methods and variables in the program together with descriptions of their function. At the lowest level, source code is
provided for the methods. This allows the reader to obtain an
overview as well as to verify the implementation of model
details.
3. Results
An important result from initial testing was the identiﬁcation
of incoherencies in the published ﬁeld data. Model ﬁtting suggested that no model could simultaneously satisfy the requirement
for matching survival rates and population sizes of females and
juveniles to the Illumø data set. It was therefore necessary to test
the validity of the ﬁeld-data patterns. A two-stage matrix model

using transition rates based on adult and juvenile survival was constructed to obtain a stable solution matching either the observed
age structure or the observed survival rates. The solution demonstrated that it was not possible to obtain the observed age structure
using the mean survival rates given by Abilgård et al. (1972), and
that to match this age structure would require a population with
an annual growth rate of 15%. The population on Illumø showed no
indications of such an increase. Since the mark-capture-recapture
methodology used in the original study was a potential source
of error, an assessment of the likelihood of generating bias of
this kind was made by simulating hare capture data in ALMaSS
and deliberately introducing bias in re-capture. In all cases these
simulations indicated that any feasible introduced bias would exacerbate the observed incoherencies. This left only the possibility that
the observed discrepancy between age structure and survival rates
was the result of stochasticity and that the 14-year time series was
not long enough to elucidate stable mean patterns. Since it was
impossible to determine which of the three measures (age structure, female survival or juvenile survival) were at fault the approach
taken was to project the juvenile/female ratio from the survival
rates and iteratively modify survival rates inside their 95% conﬁdence limits to minimise the least squares deviation from all three
target patterns. The original and resulting target patterns were:
0.438, 0.552, 0.575 cf. 0.425, 0.519, 0.531 for juvenile survival, adult
female survival and age structure (juveniles/(juveniles + females)),
respectively. These new values were then used in subsequent iterative testing.

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

251

Fig. 3. Model time series outputs and changes in response variables with changing landscape heterogeneity. (A) Typical population size time-series from main conﬁgurations
tested (C1–C4) from simulation year 21 to 60. Y-axis range is 0–150 female hares km−2 . Three out of the four conﬁgurations produced ostensibly similar dynamics to those
found on Illumø (Fig. 1B). (B) Changes in number of female hares with time from the best parameter ﬁt for model conﬁgurations C1–C4 from simulation year 21 to 60 on the
most homogenous and most heterogeneous landscapes (L1 grey & L4 black). Y-axis range is 0–150 females km−2 . (C) Using the best ﬁt parameter set with conﬁguration C4 it
is clear that density changes with landscape heterogeneity, but that variance in density decreases and variance in female weights increases. These patterns form secondary
predictions that could be tested against further ﬁeld data if available.

3.1. Iterative testing and reformulation of the model
The scope of the problem when testing a model of this type is
large since there are an unknown number of potential model conﬁgurations to test and an unknown level of difﬁculty in optimally
ﬁtting the parameters. Running a fully replicated set of all parameter values by all conﬁgurations would take many years, so a guided
parameter value selection process was used, even so in excess of
250,000 scenario runs were executed using 47 model conﬁgurations before a satisfactory ﬁt was achieved. A single run of 60 years
in daily time-steps took a mean of 25 minutes, resulting in a total
CPU time of approximately 12 years on standard 2.3 GHz PCs, or
nine months in real time with our PC cluster. The primary constraint
to testing was therefore available CPU time.
Fitting C1, C3 and C4 conﬁgurations resulted in less than 5%
deviation from the ﬁrst order target patterns of mean density,
adult and juvenile survival and variance in juvenile:adult ratio
(Fig. 2A). Density-dependent mortality (C2) failed to simultaneously ﬁt sex-ratio, survival and age-structure patterns. Fits to
juvenile survivorship could only be obtained by targeting densitydependent mortality on the leveret and young hare life-stages (not
shown). Only C4 permitted simultaneous ﬁts of all six ﬁrst order target patterns. None of the conﬁgurations ﬁtted variance in juvenile
survivorship nor variance in sex ratio, with model results consistently having too low variance, but C4 clearly provided the overall
best ﬁt to the second order target patterns (Fig. 2B). Some form of
oscillatory dynamics was evident in all four conﬁgurations (Fig. 3A),
but variance around density suggests that C1 & C3 were too extreme
and C2 too stable relative to the Illumø situation.
3.2. Breeding patterns
Litter sizes of all conﬁgurations tested fell in realistic ranges,
although the actual values varied (1.9, 2.3, 2.1, and 2.3 C1–C4,

respectively). Similar variation around acceptable values of litter
numbers also emerged (2.9, 2.7, 2.5 and 2.6, C1–C4, respectively).
3.3. Positive effect of increasing habitat heterogeneity/negative
effect of homogenous crop areas (Pattern 15)
All four conﬁgurations produced the expected increased density with increasing heterogeneity but with differing slopes (Fig. 3B
and C, Table 5), and all conﬁgurations produced litter sizes and
mean numbers of litters within acceptable ranges. Interestingly,
the models make a strong secondary prediction that variance in
hare weights should increase with homogeneity of the landscape
together with a slight increase in mean weight. In all cases where
signiﬁcant effects were found the model conﬁgurations agreed in
terms of the direction if not the magnitude of the effects.

Table 5
Slopes of ﬁtted regressions using ﬁrst order response patterns as the dependent
variable against four structurally different landscapes only differing in their heterogeneity for four model conﬁgurations. Bold indicates p < 0.05.

Weights (P1)
Female density (P2)
Adult survival (P3)
Juv survival (P4)
Juv::Ad (P5)
Sex ratio (P6)
Var weights (P7)
Var F. density (P8)
Var Ad survival (P9)
Var J survival (P10)
Var J:A (P11)
Var sex ratio (P12)
Litter size (P13)
No litters (P14)

C1

C2

C3

C4

0.08
0.17
0.00
0.02
−0.01
0.02
−1.71
34.49
−0.03
−0.01
0.00
−0.01
0.17
−0.07

0.07
0.10
0.00
−0.08
0.04
0.00
−1.98
16.48
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
−0.01
0.16

0.05
0.30
0.00
0.00
−0.01
0.00
−1.43
554.59
−0.02
0.00
0.00
−0.01
0.13
−0.02

0.03
0.19
0.00
0.00
0.00
−0.04
−0.45
615.07
0.00
0.06
0.00
0.04
0.00
−0.05

252

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

Although not one of the target patterns, cyclic dynamics were
not easy to obtain on the larger landscapes. It was also evident that
the same controlling mechanism was capable of generating very
different time series patterns even though the only factor varied
was the spatial arrangement of landscape features, with homogenous landscapes producing much less variable dynamics (Fig. 3B).
3.4. Sensitivity analysis of the resulting ﬁnal model
Model conﬁguration C4 performed better in the iterative tests
than any other conﬁguration and was used for detailed sensitivity testing. The most impressive ﬁt of C4 to the Illumø patterns
is perhaps to hare weights. The weight of each hare is emergent,
determined by the energetic relationships described above and the
local conditions affecting resource availability. Model hares experimentally fed ad libitum in the model all reached maximum weight
of 5.2 kg. The fact that the model not only generates the mean
Illumø weights accurately at 4.2 kg, but also ﬁts the sensitive pattern of variance of weight, promotes conﬁdence in model behaviour
(Fig. 2D). Fig. 2C shows an example response of the model to varying
single parameter values in the range ±40%. This example also shows
one of the most pronounced curvilinear responses observed, that
of Pattern 9, variance of adult survival. Signiﬁcant linear responses
were found in 76% of all parameter/target pattern combinations
tested together with a range of strengths of responses as indicated
by the slopes (Tables 2 and 3). The potential of a strong curvilinear
ﬁt to cause a false negative was not considered a serious problem
since a strong curvilinear response will also produce a linear ﬁt as
evidenced by Pattern 9. The model outputs for this pattern were
strongly curved; nevertheless it was not excluded as an important
response variable because of the steep slope.
Slopes can be compared directly between patterns but not
between parameters since units and potential ranges of values
differ greatly. We scaled the slopes by the corresponding ﬁtted
parameter value, which permits direct comparison of slopes by
assuming equivalency of coefﬁcients of variation.
All parameters that had large impacts affected mean female
density, with ExtEff, ALoss and FoetalGrProp (see explanations of
abbreviations in Table 4) producing the strongest responses. This
indicates the sensitivity of the model to food supply, adult survivorship and reproductive capacity.
Sensitivity of the oscillatory pattern was investigated by altering details of the C4 model conﬁguration in order to determine
the driving factor behind this pattern, since this was not immediately obvious. These manipulations indicated that oscillations
would disappear, even though population control would still be
achieved above the target level, if there was no energy deﬁcit for
adult hares moving from negative to positive energy balance. The
model is therefore sensitive to the assumption that the hares cannot replenish a long negative energy deﬁcit immediately but are
limited by their daily intake capacity.

the production of foetal mass. After birth the female must increase
her energy intake in order to provide enough energy for lactation. Energy comes from foraging from green shoot material and
the amount of energy obtained depends on the age of the shoot
and the overall structure of the vegetation. Dense vegetation may
therefore have a high food value in terms of biomass but a poor
digestibility and high impedance. A female that cannot support lactation because her combined energy intake and reserves fall too low
will abandon her young. Reproduction will not be attempted again
until energy reserves are replenished. Growth of model hares is also
dependent on energy balance and hares which do not achieve 45%
of their potential weight at any age will die. Adults rarely die of
energy shortage and are assumed to be able to “carry” a negative
energy balance. Since they will remain in the population contributing to social stress, which is the primary density-dependent
regulation factor in the hare model. Hunting occurs in Autumn but
other non-energetic related losses are based on life-stage speciﬁc
constant daily probabilities or on events driven by human management activities.
3.6. Application to model question
Naturally, none of the model conﬁgurations tested gave perfect ﬁts, but the ﬁnal model chosen could match 13 out of 15 real
world patterns, leaving only variation in juvenile survivorship and
sex ratio unaccounted for. The result erects the testable hypothesis
that controlling factors on Illumø were primarily related to densitydependence working via body condition, and not generated by the
mechanisms simulated in C1–C3.
In addition, the slopes of the parameter responses and interactions from the ﬁtted model provide a direct means to evaluate
the impact of changing a factor on the population dynamics. Several of the parameters investigated had no direct analogues to
real-world drivers. Two examples are changing food extraction
efﬁciency (ExtEff) and the proportion of energy that the female
is assumed to give to producing young, both of which are important parameters resulting in strong responses. In some cases where
parameters have real world analogues, the slopes can be used
directly (loss rates and rainfall), whereas the response to landscape
structural changes required the application of scenarios and further
analysis. Overall it is clear that factors affecting the survival of the
adult female hares have a marked impact on total population numbers, juvenile and young loss also having a major impact. Rainfall
is likely to be important too, but does not seem to have as strong
an impact. The strong response to increasing habitat heterogeneity also indicates the importance of habitat quality and provides a
direct indication of one practical approach to improving conditions
for hares also suggested in UK hare conservation (Vaughan et al.,
2003; Smith et al., 2004).
4. Discussion

3.5. Model documentation
The ODdox for the brown hare model is provided in the supplementary materials (Appendix 1) and should be referred to for full
documentation. A summary of the ﬁnal model is presented here:
The hare model runs inside a dynamic landscape simulation
incorporating detailed topography, weather, and human activities
in the form of agricultural management and infrastructure. The
hares are simulated in ﬁve life-stages: infants up to 11 days during
which they are totally dependent on the lactating doe; young 12–35
days old after which they are fully weaned, juveniles 35–365 days
old, adult males and females. The model hare is quite mobile and
able to ﬁnd suitable forage over a wide area when not encumbered
with young. Breeding starts in Spring if body condition allows for

The pattern-oriented approach to testing models is becoming
widely used both in ecology and other branches of biology, as
well as other sciences. Examples vary from testing shorebird models (Goss-Custard et al., 2006) to consumer behaviour (Zhang and
Zhang, 2007) and wound healing (Mi et al., 2007). The range of
applications makes generalisations difﬁcult, but the reﬁnement of
existing protocols for testing and communicating model structure
may facilitate progress. We propose the adoption of ‘the modelling cycle’ for a complex system of interacting agents (Grimm and
Railsback, 2005a), together with a documentation process based
on using OOD for smaller models, and ODdox for larger simulations systems. However, during development of the hare model
it was clear that a primary cause for concern was the incomplete

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

Fig. 4. Diagramatic representation of the modelling cycle protocol. After initialising
the cycle by deﬁning a model question it is necessary to traverse the complete POM
(Pattern Oriented Modelling) process at least once, thereafter should the model performance meet the performance criteria the cycle will be interrupted and sensitivity
analysis and documentation performed.

understanding of the ﬁeld data patterns used for testing. Limitations of these data sets only became apparent after considerable
model testing, requiring re-formulation and the use of simple models for screening, suggesting that inconsistencies in published data
are not always easy to identify. It would therefore be useful to add
a further stage to the modelling protocol designed to explore ﬁeld
data patterns and check for inconsistencies as part of the iterative
model cycle (Fig. 4).
The subsequent parameter ﬁtting of the chosen model conﬁguration should lead into a sensitivity analysis. In the case of the
brown hare model long run times required efﬁcient sensitivity
analysis procedures. There are a number of methods of sensitivity
analysis suitable for ABMs such as the hare simulation, but complex approaches like Extended Fourier Amplitude Sensitivity Test
(Saltelli et al., 1999) or Bayesian MCMC approaches do not provide information with a clear physical meaning (Ravalico et al.,
2005). Ravalico et al. (2005) compared sensitivity analysis methods for complex models in environmental management, concluding
that none of the current methods met all criteria of efﬁciency and
applicability. With multiple response variables, the number of runs
required to carry out in this study would have been too great so we
adopted a simple scaled regression approach, providing a physical
reference for the results. This easily accessible approach provided
the basic information that was required for understanding the system responses.
In contrast to other hare species, cycling has not been described
for the brown hare, it being considered a non-cyclic species (Keith,

253

1983). Although there are no reports of clear cyclicity, support for
the fact that this might occur does exist. There is evidence to suggests there may be phases of 8 years in some British game-bag data
(Tapper, 1992), and there has been some indication of phases of
population change related to fecundity (Marboutin et al., 2003).
The lack of observed cycling may be due to the spatial and temporal heterogeneity in brown hare habitats, and also to the fact that
cycles might disappear or be hard to ﬁnd in declining populations,
or in larger landscapes as we showed in this study (Fig. 2, C4). In
contrast to factors causing decline, the lack of clear cyclicity means
that population regulation in the brown hare has not been well
studied. However, there is strong evidence that adult survival is
generally constant and high (Smith et al., 2005), whereas fecundity
is highly variable both in terms of reproductive output and survival of young hares (Marboutin and Peroux, 1995; Marboutin and
Hansen, 1998), both factors matching with the conditions required
to produce oscillations in C4.
The POM testing produced a new hypothesis for brown hare
population regulation that does not appear to have been discussed
previously. Testing of model conﬁgurations clearly suggested that
the conﬁguration based upon interference competition (C4) produced the best ﬁt to observed patterns. This is in contrast to
mountain hare Lepus timidus populations which are thought to
cycle due to host–parasite interactions (Newey et al., 2007).
Abilgård et al. (1972) indicated that there was no epidemic disease on Illumø, but that hares were found dead from both disease
and parasitic causes, so the role played by parasites and disease
cannot be entirely ignored. However, the role of interference as a
regulating factor is indicated in other studies. High natal dispersal
and inverse density dependent dispersal rates have been shown
in the brown hare (Bray et al., 2007). These were considered to
arise from two possible hypotheses: the social fence hypothesis
(Hestbeck, 1988) whereby movement is limited by avoidance of
social stress in high density areas; and an alternative whereby social
stress causes only small-scale movements high density areas to
accommodate re-distribution of resources. In both cases they make
the explicit assumption of social stress or interference competition.
The C4 conﬁguration invokes dispersal by the hare in response to
food stress, primarily in females (evidenced by the skewed sex ratio
in C4 model hares). This dispersal to obtain resources for females
conforms to expectations based upon Greenwood’s resource competition hypothesis (Greenwood, 1980) and general expectations
for polygynous-promiscuous mammals (Perrin and Mazalov, 2000).
Further support for this hypothesis comes from Monaghan and
Metcalfe (1985) who describe increasing aggressive behaviour and
time spent running as hare density around a food source increased.
If we accept that interference competition was the main population regulating factor on Illumø, this does not necessarily mean
that it is a powerful effect. Indeed, we found that cyclic population dynamics was very much reduced in a larger landscape and
low heterogeneity, which suggests that the phenomenon would be
easily disrupted should further environmental variability be introduced. Experimentation with the model demonstrated that the
effect was primarily linked to reproductive output via temporary
deterioration of female physiological status due to lowered energy
intake. Cyclicity was a result of carrying an energy deﬁcit and
acted as a synchronising factor causing low fecundity in the period
following low food and high density. The longevity of the hares
exacerbates this effect whereby a high density of adults will have a
long-term effect on the growth rates and fecundity of subsequent
young. This situation is analogous to snowshoe hare population
dynamics where cyclicity has been attributed to a tri-trophic effect
whereby food stress is caused by avoidance of predation (Krebs
et al., 1995), and may be a more widespread phenomenon (Creel
and Christianson, 2008). There is also evidence from the snowshoe
hare that different morphs alternate through different phases of the

254

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255

cycle and that this could work synergistically with extrinsic causes
(Sinclair et al., 2003). This situation is very close to the interference
competition with a minimum breeding weight conﬁguration (C4)
which was selected as the best ﬁt to the Illumø conditions.
In terms of identifying the primary regulating factor on Illumø
we would clearly choose interference competition. However, success should not only be judged by the models explanatory or
forecasting ability (Conroy et al., 1995), but also on its contribution
to understanding the system. In the real world we would expect
multiple mechanisms to contribute to the dynamics, but in varying
degrees. This argues for the inclusion of mechanisms that we know
exist but cannot justify in terms of the information used to ﬁt the
model. One approach to this problem would be to build in all mechanisms subsequent to ﬁtting the primary mechanism and to adjust
the ﬁt from this point; providing the most optimal framework for
testing population control hypotheses. This argues for a systems
approach to modelling for ecologically complex questions. Thus
complex ABM systems models such as ALMaSS could be used as
a framework for understanding the biological system when linked
to ﬁeld studies to create a cycle of improvement of understanding.
This would eventually lead to realistic models that would be mechanistically rich enabling better predictive potential, since they are
mechanistic and more complete, than using reductionist modelling
approaches. Completeness also infers the added advantage of ﬂexibility, for example if dispersal and mating behaviour are realistic in
a population model, then it could easily be augmented for tackling
population genetic questions (e.g. Topping et al., 2003a). Similar
approaches have been advocated in landscape ecology, as generative landscape science (Brown et al., 2006), and in immunology and
cell biology as a complementary approach to wet-laboratory study
(Kleppe et al., 2006) where they have clear advantages in terms of
pedagogy, testing and study of emergent phenomena and quantitative predictions (Bersini, 2006). When using models of this type
experimentation and hypothesis testing is easier, it is easier to isolate and test single mechanisms, and data can be integrated from
several different experiments into a single in silico experimental
system (Forrest and Beauchemin, 2007).
Better communication of the models, perhaps using the ODdox
method, may open up the ‘black-box’ sufﬁciently to provide access
to the scientiﬁc community. It may then be possible to develop
these larger and complex models as longer term collaborations,
such as seen in development of open source programming projects.
In this case, discussion and data to challenge the mechanisms
implemented ought to be forthcoming as a community function.
5. Conclusions
An agent-based model of the European brown hare was evaluated by pattern-oriented modelling resulting in new insights into
the species’ ecology and population regulation. Most of the known
behavioural biology and mechanistic details of the species was
incorporated into the model. This holistic modelling approach provided the ﬂexibility to evaluate contrasting population regulation
hypotheses by integrating multiple factors in space and time to
produce systems level responses. The approach therefore lends
itself to studying multifactor whole organism systems. The common criticism of lack of model transparency was addressed by
deﬁning simple but effective protocols for the application of model
development and documentation; potentially paving the way for a
community-based collaborative study of complex systems.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks to Peter Odderskær and Jacob Nabe-Nielsen for their
comments on the manuscript. CJT and CRO were funded by the

Danish Forest and Nature Agency via the programme Game and
Landscape. TTH was funded by the Danish Natural Science Council, Centre for Integrated Population Ecology (CIPE). Contributions:
CJT designed, implemented and tested the model and drafted the
manuscript and was responsible for the ODdox documentation
concept and implementation. TTH carried out statistical analysis,
participated in model evaluation and drafting of the manuscript.
CRO supplied hare ecological and energetic information and provided the biological basis for the model design. All authors read and
approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2009.09.014.
References
Abilgård, F., Andersen, J., Barndorff-Nielsen, O., 1972. The hare population (Lepus
europaeus Pallas) of Illumø Island, Denmark. A report on the analysis of the data
from 1957-1970. Danish Review of Game Biology 6, 1–32.
Bersini, H., 2006. Immune system modeling: the OO way. In: Artiﬁcial Immune
Systems, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 150–163.
Bray, Y., Devillard, S., Marboutin, E., Mauvy, B., Peroux, R., 2007. Natal dispersal of
european hare in France. Journal of Zoology 273, 426–434.
Brown, D.G., Aspinall, R., Bennett, D.A., 2006. Landscape models and explanation
in landscape ecology—a space for generative landscape science? Professional
Geographer 58, 369–382.
Cappelen, J., Laursen, E.V., Kern-Hansen, C. (Eds.), 2008. DMI Daily Climate Data
Collection 1873-2007, Denmark, The Faroe Islands and Greenland. Technical
Report 08-05. Danish Meteorological Institute, 41 pp.
Conroy, M.J., Cohen, Y., James, F.C., Matsinos, Y.G., Maurer, B.A., 1995. Parameterestimation, reliability, and model improvement for spatially explicit models of
animal populations. Ecological Applications 5, 17–19.
Creel, S., Christianson, D., 2008. Relationships between direct predation and risk
effects. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 23, 194–201.
DeAngelis, D.L., Mooij, W.M., 2003. In praise of mechanistically-rich models. In:
Canham, C.D., Cole, J.J., Lauenroth, W.K. (Eds.), Models in Ecosystem Science.
Princeton University Press, Princeton New Jersey, pp. 62–83.
Forrest, S., Beauchemin, C., 2007. Computer immunology. Immunological Reviews
216, 176–197.
Goss-Custard, J.D., Burton, N.H.K., Clark, N.A., Ferns, P.N., McGrorty, S., Reading, C.J.,
Rehﬁsch, M.M., Stillman, R.A., Townend, I., West, A.D., Worrall, D.H., 2006. Test
of a behavior-based individual-based model: response of shorebird mortality to
habitat loss. Ecological Applications 16, 2215–2222.
Greenwood, P.J., 1980. Mating systems, philopatry and dispersal in birds and mammals. Animal Behaviour 28, 1140–1162.
Grimm, V., 2002. Visual debugging: a way of analyzing, understanding and communicating bottom-up simulation models in ecology. Natural Resource Modeling
15, 23–38.
Grimm, V., Railsback, S.F., 2005a. Individual-Based Modeling and Ecology. Princeton Series in Theoretical and Computational Biology. Princeton University Press,
Princeton and Oxford.
Grimm, V., Frank, K., Jeltsch, F., Brandl, R., Uchmanski, J., Wissel, C., 1996. Patternoriented modelling in population ecology. Science of the Total Environment 183,
151–166.
Grimm, V., Revilla, E., Berger, U., Jeltsch, F., Mooij, W.M., Railsback, S.F., Thulke, H.H.,
Weiner, J., Wiegand, T., DeAngelis, D.L., 2005b. Pattern-oriented modeling of
agent-based complex systems: lessons from ecology. Science 310, 987–991.
Grimm, V., Berger, U., Bastiansen, F., Eliassen, S., Ginot, V., Giske, J., Goss-Custard, J.,
Grand, T., Heinz, S.K., Huse, G., Huth, A., Jepsen, J.U., Jorgensen, C., Mooij, W.M.,
Muller, B., Pe’er, G., Piou, C., Railsback, S.F., Robbins, A.M., Robbins, M.M., Rossmanith, E., Ruger, N., Strand, E., Souissi, S., Stillman, R.A., Vabo, R., Visser, U.,
DeAngelis, D.L., 2006. A standard protocol for describing individual-based and
agent-based models. Ecological Modelling 198, 115–126.
Hansen, K., 1992. Reproduction in European hare in Danish farmland. Acta Theriologica 37, 27–40.
Hestbeck, J.B., 1988. Population regulation of cyclic mammals—a model of the social
fence hypothesis. Oikos 52, 156–168.
Hutchings, M., Harris, S., 1996. The current status of the brown hare (Lepus europaeus)
in Britain.
Keith, L.B., 1983. Role of food in hare population cycles. Oikos 40, 385–395.
Kleppe, R., Kjarland, E., Selheim, F., 2006. Proteomic and computational methods in
systems modeling of cellular signaling. Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
7, 135–145.
Krebs, C.J., Boutin, S., Boonstra, R., Sinclair, A.R.E., Smith, J.N.M., Dale, M.R.T., Martin,
K., Turkington, R., 1995. Impact of food and predation on the snowshoe hare
cycle. Science 269, 1112–1115.
Marboutin, E., Peroux, R., 1995. Survival pattern of European hare in a decreasing
population. Journal of Applied Ecology 32, 809–816.

C.J. Topping et al. / Ecological Modelling 221 (2010) 245–255
Marboutin, E., Hansen, K., 1998. Survival rates in a nonharvested brown hare population. Journal of Wildlife Management 62, 772–779.
Marboutin, E., Bray, Y., Peroux, R., Mauvy, B., Lartiges, A., 2003. Population dynamics
in European hare: breeding parameters and sustainable harvest rates. Journal of
Applied Ecology 40, 580–591.
Mi, Q., Riviere, B., Clermont, G., Steed, D.L., Vodovotz, Y., 2007. Agent-based model
of inﬂammation and wound healing: insights into diabetic foot ulcer pathology
and the role of transforming growth factor-beta 1. Wound Repair Regeneration
15, 671–682.
Monaghan, P., Metcalfe, N.B., 1985. Group foraging in wild brown hares—effects of
resource distribution and social-status. Animal Behaviour 33, 993–999.
Newey, S., Dahl, F., Willebrand, T., Thirgood, S., 2007. Unstable dynamics and population limitation in mountain hares. Biological Review 82, 527–549.
Perrin, N., Mazalov, V., 2000. Local competition, inbreeding, and the evolution of
sex-biased dispersal. American Naturalist 155, 116–127.
Pﬁster, H.P., Kohli, L., Kästli, P., Birrer, S., 2002. Feldhase. Schlussbericht 1999-2000,
Bern.
Pielowski, Z., 1975. Charakterystyka ekologiczna populacji zajaca Lepus europaeus
Pallas, 1778. Roczniki Akademii Rolniczej W Poznaniu, 65, 1–33.
Pielowski, Z., 1976. Number of young born and dynamics of the European hare population. In: Pielowski, Z., Pucek, Z. (Eds.), Ecology and Management of European
Hare Populations. Polish Hunting Association, Warsaw, pp. 75–78.
Raczynski, J., 1964. Studies on the European hare. V. Reproduction. Acta Theriologica
9, 305–352.
Ravalico, J.K., Mair, H.R., Dandy, G.C., Norton, J.P., Croke, B.F., 2005. A comparison of
sensitivity analysis technques for complex models for environmental management. In: Zerger, A., Argent, R.M. (Eds.), MODSIM 2005 International Congress
on Modelling and Simulation. Modelling and Simulation Society of Australia and
New Zealand, pp. 2533–2539.
Rizzotto, M., Focardi, S., 1997. A physiologically-based model of a self-motivated
hare in relation to its ecology. Ecological Modelling 95, 191–209.
Saltelli, A., Tarantola, S., Chan, K.P.S., 1999. A quantitative model-independent
method for global sensitivity analysis of model output. Technometrics 41, 39–56.
SAS, 2002. SAS.
Sinclair, A.R.E., Chitty, D., Stefan, C.I., Krebs, C.J., 2003. Mammal population cycles:
evidence for intrinsic differences during snowshoe hare cycles. Canadian Journal
of Zoology-Revue Canadienne De Zoologie 81, 216–220.

255

Smith, R.K., Jennings, N.V., Harris, S., 2005. A quantitative analysis of the abundance
and demography of European hares Lepus europaeus in relation to habitat type,
intensity of agriculture and climate. Mammal Review 35, 1–24.
Smith, R.K., Jennings, N.V., Robinson, A., Harris, S., 2004. Conservation of European
hares Lepus europaeus in Britain: is increasing habitat heterogeneity in farmland
the answer? Journal of Applied Ecology 41, 1092–1102.
Stillman, R.A., Goss-Custard, J.D., West, A.D., Durell, S., McGrorty, S., Caldow, R.W.G.,
Norris, K.J., Johnstone, I.G., Ens, B.J., Van der Meer, J., Triplet, P., 2001. Predicting
shorebird mortality and population size under different regimes of shellﬁshery
management. Journal of Applied Ecology 38, 857–868.
Strandgaard, H., Asferg, T., 1980. The Danish Bag Record II. Fluctuations and trends
in Game bag record in years 1941-1976 and geograprical distribution of bag in
1976. Danish Review of Game Biology 11, 32–33.
Tapper, S.C., 1992. Game Heritage. An Ecological Review from Shooting and Gamekeeping Records. Game Conservancey Ltd., Hampshire, UK.
Tapper, S.C., Parsons, N., 1984. The changing status of the Brown Hare (Lepus capensis L.) in Britain. Mammal Review 14, 57–70.
Topping, C., Ostergaard, S., Pertoldi, C., Bach, L.A., 2003a. Modelling the loss of genetic
diversity in vole populations in a spatially and temporally varying environment.
Annales Zoologici Fennici 40, 255–267.
Topping, C.J., Odderskaer, P., 2004. Modeling the inﬂuence of temporal and spatial
factors on the assessment of impacts of pesticides on skylarks. Environmental
Toxicology and Chemistry 23, 509–520.
Topping, C.J., Hansen, T.S., Jensen, T.S., Jepsen, J.U., Nikolajsen, F., Odderskaer, P.,
2003b. ALMaSS, an agent-based model for animals in temperate European landscapes. Ecological Modelling 167, 65–82.
van Heesch, D., 1997. Doxygen. www.doxygen.org.
Vaughan, N., Lucas, E.A., Harris, S., White, P.C.L., 2003. Habitat associations of European hares Lepus europaeus in England and Wales: implications for farmland
management. Journal of Applied Ecology 40, 163–175.
Wiegand, T., Revilla, E., Knauer, F., 2004. Dealing with uncertainty in spatially explicit
population models. Biodiversity and Conservation 13, 53–78.
Wiegand, T., Jeltsch, F., Hanski, I., Grimm, V., 2003. Using pattern-oriented modeling
for revealing hidden information: a key for reconciling ecological theory and
application. Oikos 100, 209–222.
Zhang, T., Zhang, D., 2007. Agent-based simulation of consumer purchase decisionmaking and the decoy effect. Journal of Business Research 60, 912–922.

